
--- PAGE 3 ---
Acknowledgements
The Department of Education of Prince Edward Island gratefully acknowledges the contribution of the
elementary health curriculum committee and the pilot teachers to the development of this curriculum
guide. Current and past members of the committee include the following:
Charlene Duffy, Queen Charlotte Intermediate School
Janice Carragher-Doyle, Athena Consolidated School
Randy MacIntyre, Rollo Bay Consolidated School
Dianne Nabuurs, Cardigan Consolidated School
Linda McGuire, Glen Stewart Elementary School
Shanna Perry, Alberton Elementary School
Stella MacInnis, Tignish Elementary School
Doug Doyle, Summerside Intermediate School
Shirley Foley, Greenfield Elementary School
Laura Cudmore, Western School Board
Keith Tanton, Department of Health
Catherine Freeze, Department of Health
Laura Bowness, PEI Home and School Representative
Eva Strongman, PEI Home and School Representative
Garth Turtle, Department of Education
Lyall Huggan, Department of Education
Lori MacPherson, Department of Education
Pilot Teachers:
Diane Rennie, Alberton Elementary School
Andrew Stewart, Alberton Elementary School
Janice Carragher-Doyle, Athena Consolidated School
LoreLei MacArthur, Athena Consolidated School
Sylvia Burke, Athena Consolidated School
Peggy Gillis, Athena Consolidated School
Shaaron Mullins, Glen Stewart Elementary School
Sandra Hoy, Glen Stewart Elementary School
Gloria Cook, Glen Stewart Elementary School
The Department of Education is also grateful to the province of Alberta for granting permission to
reproduce/adapt materials from the Kindergarten to Grade 9 Health and Life Skills Guide to Implementation
document to assist us in the development of this guide.
Reproduced/Adapted with permission from Alberta Education, Kindergarten to Grade 9 Health and Life
Skills Guide to Implementation (Edmonton, AB: Alberta Learning, 2002).
This curriculum guide is intended to provide teachers with the overview of the outcomes framework for
grade 1 health education and to assist teachers in designing learning experiences and assessment tasks.
HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1 1
--- PAGE 5 ---
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Table of Contents
Acknowledgements ....................................................................1
Program Rationale and Philosophy.............................................5
Meeting The Needs of All Learners.............................................6
Assessment and Evaluation .........................................................7
General Curriculum Outcomes ..................................................8
Specific Curriculum Outcomes ..................................................9
How To Use The Four-Column Curriculum Layout..................9
The Four-Column Spread ........................................................10
Literature Support Kits.............................................................11
Teacher Notes ..........................................................................12
Curriculum Outcomes Overview .............................................13
Wellness Choices ......................................................................17
Relationship Choices................................................................35
Life Learning Choices...............................................................49
Appendix
• Teacher Background Notes/Student Activity Sheets
HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1 3
--- PAGE 7 ---
Program Rationale and Philosophy
Health education involves learning about the habits, behaviors, interactions and decisions related to
healthy daily living and planning for the future. The home, school and community play important roles
in contributing to the healthy personal development of students, by providing an opportunity for them
to consider information and acquire, practise and demonstrate strategies for dealing with the challenges
of life and living.
The aim of the health curriculum is to enable students to make well-informed, healthy choices and to
develop behaviors that contribute to the well-being of self and others.
(cid:127) Choices are based on attitudes, beliefs and values. The family is the primary educator in the
development of student attitudes and values. The school and community play a supportive and
crucial role in building on these attitudes and values.
(cid:127) To make responsible and healthy choices, students need to know how to seek out relevant and
accurate information. They learn health-related information from many sources, including home,
school, peers, the community and the media. This program assists students in identifying reliable
sources of information and in becoming discerning consumers of health-related information.
(cid:127) Students develop decision-making skills that support informed personal health practices and
responsibility for health, learn to prevent or reduce risk, and have opportunities to demonstrate
caring for self and others.
(cid:127) Students focus on safety and injury prevention and develop strategies to assess risk, to reduce
potential harm, and to identify support systems for self and others. Students learn about products,
substances and behaviors that may be injurious to their health. They also learn strategies to use in
unsafe situations.
(cid:127) Students are encouraged to promote and maintain health as a valued and valuable resource, and to
examine health issues and factors that promote or limit good health. They gain an understanding
of their individual behaviors, as well as social and environmental factors which all have an impact
on their health.
(cid:127) In an environment of acceptance, understanding, respect and caring, students can learn to
acknowledge and express personal feelings and emotions, as well as to appreciate the strengths and
talents of self and others. There are opportunities for students to accept and appreciate diversity
and the uniqueness of self and others in our global society. There is an emphasis on healthy
interactions and safe and caring relationships. Friendship skills are developed and then extended to
incorporate skills for working in groups.
(cid:127) Students build and expand upon safe and supportive networks for self and others that link the
home, school and community.
(cid:127) Students develop the skill of goal setting and begin to realize their ability to influence or control
many outcomes and results.
HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1 5
--- PAGE 8 ---
Meeting The Needs of All Learners
Students learn in different ways and at different rates. Each student comes to class with varying interests,
experiences, developmental maturity, background knowledge and skills. What is important is that within
each lesson, there is something for everyone - something that meets the needs and learning styles of each
and every student.
An effective approach for accommodating student differences is to begin lessons with a whole-group
activity and shared experience. Students then choose from a variety of ways to process their thinking and
represent their learning. This allows students to work on the same concept in ways that most suit their
individual learning styles and developmental stages. Teachers should utilize materials and strategies that
accommodate student diversity and ensure that all students have equitable opportunities to experience
success as they work toward achieving designated outcomes.
Learning supports for students with special needs, including English as a second language (ESL) and
English language learner (ELL) students, could include:
(cid:127) alternate formats for print materials, such as audiotapes, large print, talking computer books and
read alouds
(cid:127) a scribe for written assignments and/or tests
(cid:127) access to computers
(cid:127) content-area spelling and vocabulary word lists
(cid:127) peer support
(cid:127) questions to guide or focus reading
(cid:127) demonstrations or modelled examples
(cid:127) extra time to complete work
(cid:127) highlighted or underlined sections in textbooks
(cid:127) specific assistance with organization
(cid:127) graphic organizers
(cid:127) visual prompts and pictures.
The variety of learning experiences described in this guide and the suggestions for a variety of assessment
practices will assist teachers in accommodating the diversity of learners.
6 HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1
--- PAGE 9 ---
Assessment and Evaluation
The terms “assessment” and “evaluation” are often used interchangeably, but they refer to quite different
processes.
Assessment is the systematic process of gathering information on student learning.
Assessment Techniques
(cid:127) Informal / Formal Observation - information is gathered while a lesson is in progress. When used
formally, the student would be made aware of what is being observed and the criteria being
assessed. Informally, it could be a frequent, but brief, check on a given criterion. You might be
observing the student’s participation level, use of a piece of equipment or application of a process.
You could record the results with a checklist, a rating scale, or written notes. Remember to plan
the criteria, have recording forms ready, and be sure all students are observed in a reasonable time
period.
(cid:127) Performance - encourages learning through active participation. This could be a demonstration/
presentation. The performance is most often assessed through observation.
(cid:127) Journals - provide opportunity for students to express thoughts and ideas in a reflective way. They
permit a student to consider strengths and weaknesses, attitudes, interests, and new ideas.
(cid:127) Interview - promotes understanding and application of concepts. Interviewing a student allows the
teacher to confirm that learning has taken place beyond factual recall. They may be brief or
extensive. Students should know what criteria will be used to assess formal interviews. This
assessment technique provides an opportunity to students whose verbal presentation skills are
stronger than their written skills.
(cid:127) Paper and Pencil - can be formative or summative. (Written assignment or test.)
(cid:127) Presentation - requires students to analyze and interpret information and to then communicate it.
These may be given orally, in written/pictorial form, project summary, or by using video or
computer software.
(cid:127) Portfolio - allows the student to be central in the process. Students can make decisions about what
goes in it, how it is used, and how it is evaluated. It should provide a long term record of growth in
learning and skills.
Evaluation is the process of analyzing, reflecting upon, and summarizing assessment information, and
making judgments or decisions based upon the information gathered. The assessment provides the data,
and the evaluation process brings meaning to the data. When students are aware of the outcomes for
which they are responsible and of the criteria by which their work will be assessed or evaluated, they can
make informed decisions about the most effective ways to demonstrate their learning.
HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1 7
--- PAGE 10 ---
General Curriculum Outcomes
Three general outcomes serve as the foundation for the health curriculum.
Wellness Choices
• Students will make responsible and informed choices to maintain health and to promote safety for
self and others.
Throughout the grades, students study active living, positive health habits, growth and change,
body image, nutrition, substance awareness, and abuse awareness, as developmentally appropriate.
Each grade level focuses on different aspects of these significant health issues.
Consideration about safety for self and others in the home, school and community begins in the
early grades and continues throughout the program.
Relationship Choices
(cid:127) Students will develop effective interpersonal skills that demonstrate responsibility, respect and
caring in order to establish and maintain healthy interactions.
Students learn the characteristics of healthy relationships. They learn that the development and
maintenance of effective relationships requires the communication skills of listening, expressing
needs and emotions, and providing feedback. They learn about support networks, mentors, and
developing healthy relationships and positive interdependence.
Students learn how to maintain relationships and how to deal with change and transitions in a
variety of life roles.
They also learn to value the strengths and gifts of self and others, as well as their uniqueness.
Life Learning Choices
(cid:127) Students will use resources effectively to manage and explore life roles and career opportunities
and challenges.
Students begin to develop practices, knowledge and skills related to career development in grade
one. They learn to respect the property of others and to understand the concepts of consequences
and accountability.
Self-direction and personal responsibility are developed as students learn to organize and manage
their own resources of time, energy and personal property.
Students begin by recognizing the strengths, interests, attributes and skills of self and others as a
basis for understanding that opportunities and possibilities for learning are ever present and
lifelong.
Service learning experiences and explorations provide students with opportunities to learn, practice,
and refine skills while making meaningful contributions to their families, schools and
communities.
The general curriculum outcomes are interrelated and interdependent. Each is to be achieved through a
variety of experiences. The emphasis is on overall well-being. Students learn to enhance attitudes and
behaviors that reflect healthy choices and reduce the potential for harm. They develop personal
responsibility for health and they demonstrate caring for others.
8 HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1
--- PAGE 11 ---
Specific Curriculum Outcomes
Each general curriculum outcome includes specific curriculum outcomes that students are expected to
achieve by the end of each grade. Specific outcomes within each grade are developmentally appropriate,
building upon and making connections to prior learning.
Thus, the specific curriculum outcomes are progressive and lead to more developmentally complex
thinking skills that address the interrelated dimensions of health: physical, emotional/social, mental/
cognitive, spiritual. The specific outcomes incorporate the potential for students to extend and refine
learning in real-life situations.
Depending on the learning context and developmental needs of students, outcomes can be integrated or
reclustered within the grade, as appropriate.
How To Use The Four-Column Curriculum Layout
The curriculum has been organized into four columns to relate learning experiences to the outcomes by:
(cid:127) providing a range of strategies for learning and teaching associated with a specific outcome or a
cluster of outcomes
(cid:127) demonstrating the relationship between outcomes and assessment strategies
(cid:127) suggesting ways that teachers can make cross-curricular connections
(cid:127) providing teachers with resource suggestions.
Column 1: Outcomes
Column 1 provides specific curriculum outcomes describing what students are expected to know, be
able to do, and, hopefully, value by the end of the year.
Specific outcomes are identified with an abbreviation: for example, W-1.6, R-1.3, or L-1.7. The
letter in the abbreviation refers to the general outcome - Wellness, Relationship, or Life Learning
Choices. The number after the hyphen is the grade level, and the final number refers to the order
number of the specific outcome.
Sensitive Topics - The heart symbol Ì is used to identify outcomes that should be addressed with
sensitivity.
Column 2: Elaboration-Strategies for Learning and Teaching
This column offers a range of strategies from which teachers and students may choose. It is not
necessary to use any or all of these suggestions.
Column 3: Tasks for Instruction and/or Assessment
This column provides suggestions for ongoing assessment that form an integral part of the learning
experience.
HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1 9
--- PAGE 12 ---
Column 4: Resources/Notes
This column provides additional information for teachers including literature support resource
titles, cross-curricular links, supplementary resources and web links. Appendix items such as teacher
background notes and student information and activity sheets are also indicated in this column.
The Four-Column Spread
The curriculum has been organized in four columns in a two-page layout as illustrated below. The
content of these columns is explained on pages 9 and 10.
10 HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1
--- PAGE 13 ---
Literature Support Kits
Each grade level has three main strands: Wellness Choices, Relationship Choices, and Life Learning
Choices. There are three literature support kits to support curriculum outcomes. A list of the resources
included in each of these kits is provided below, as well as in the kit itself, to help teachers with the
management of inventory.
Wellness Choices Relationship Choices Life Learning Choices
Signs All Around Wilfrid Gordon McDonald Partridge Nurses
Brushing Well Whoever You Are Police Officers
Fats, Oils, and Sweets Priscilla and Rosy Doctors
Drinking Water Some Kids Are Deaf Dentists
The Dairy Group Some Kids Wear Leg Braces Fire Fighters
The Grain Group Some Kids Are Blind School Bus Drivers
Eating Right Some Kids Use Wheelchairs School Principals
The Meat and Protein Group When I Feel Sad Omar On Ice
The Fruit Group When I Feel Scared Nadia is a Food Bank Volunteer
The Vegetable Group When I Feel Jealous Who Should...? Our World is Our
Responsibility
A Dog for You When I Feel Angry
I Am In Charge of Me
When I Care About Others
A Day in the Life of an EMT
Forgiveness
Safety First
Sportsmanship
Politeness
Patience
Cooperation
Responsibility
Consideration
Peacefulness
Honesty
Respect
Friendliness
Caring
Tolerance
The Family Book
HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1 11
--- PAGE 14 ---
Teacher Notes
(cid:127) Percentage of instructional time for elementary health grades 1-3:
4% (12 minutes/day, 1 hour/week, or 72 minutes/6 day cycle)
(cid:127) c.a.r.e. Kits
All English Programs schools have been provided with a c.a.r.e. (Challenge Abuse Through Respect
Education) kit (sixth edition). The c.a.r.e. kit is a personal safety program for students in grades 1-3,
with a focus to prevent child sexual abuse.
See page 104 in the c.a.r.e. kit resource guide for grade level guidelines.
Part 1 - Use with Grade 1
Part 2 - Use with Grade 2
Part 3 - Use with Grade 3
Please provide parents with information about the program. The minimum expectation is to inform them
by letter that the program is being used. However, some schools do have an information meeting or
discuss the program at events such as “Meet-The-Teacher Night”.
Schools may choose to deliver the c.a.r.e. program component in different ways. Choose from the
following:
a). The school counsellor and classroom teacher team teach the program.
b). The classroom teacher delivers the program. The school counsellor should be in the building when
this is taking place. The school counsellor is invited to a session.
(The program is not designed to illicit disclosures, but they can occur.)
c). The school counsellor delivers the program.
Larger schools may borrow an extra kit. Please contact the health curriculum specialist at the Department
of Education.
(cid:127) In column 4, Other Suggested Resources (books, videos, websites) are listed. Teachers are encouraged
to use a variety of resources to address the curriculum outcomes (videos, posters, reference materials,
community programs, websites, resource people, etc.). Please ensure that the material you are using is
appropriate, engaging, and accurate.
(cid:127) Eastern School District teachers have access to a selection of materials from the Teachers’ Resource
Centre. Western School District teachers are encouraged to visit the Little Red School House for
resources. All teachers are encouraged to use the Confederation Centre Library and to consult with the
teacher-librarians in their schools for updated video curriculum lists as well as other resources.
(cid:127) Each school has a School Healthy Eating Toolkit from the PEI Healthy Eating Alliance.
(cid:127) The heart symbol Ì is used to identify outcomes that should be addressed with sensitivity. It is
important to know your students and to consider what outcomes/issues should be handled with care.
(cid:127) Consider community opportunities when planning. Look for designated weeks or months such as
Verbal Abuse Prevention week or Heart and Stroke Month, to address topics that complement the
health curriculum.
12 HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1
--- PAGE 15 ---
CURRICULUM OUTCOMES OVERVIEW
Grade 1
compare and contrast positive and negative nonverbal
WELLNESS CHOICES-General Curriculum Outcome
communication and associated feelings
Students will make responsible and informed
choices to maintain health and to promote
Interactions
safety for self and others.
Students will be expected to:
Specific Curriculum Outcomes
identify characteristics of being a good friend
Personal Health
explain how personal behaviours and attitudes can
Students will be expected to: influence the feelings and actions of others
describe the health benefits of physical activity demonstrate age-appropriate ways to resolve conflict
with limited assistance
demonstrate positive hygiene and health care habits
Group Roles and Processes
identify the specific physical changes that occur during
early childhood Students will be expected to:
identify physical characteristics that make themselves both work cooperatively with a partner
similar to and different from others
recognize and accept individual differences within
recognize the importance of basic healthy nutritional choices
groups and families
to well-being of self
LIFE LEARNING CHOICES-General Curriculum Outcome
Safety and Responsibility
Students will use resources effectively to manage
Students will be expected to:
and explore life roles and career opportunities and
identify symbols and safety rules for hazardous household challenges.
products
Specific Curriculum Outcomes
describe actions to use in unsafe or abusive situations
describe fire safety behaviours and burn injury preventions Learning Strategies
describe appropriate safety behaviours in and around a Students will be expected to:
school building and on and around a school playground
demonstrate age-appropriate independence in
demonstrate how to seek emergency help using 911 completing tasks and activities
explore different ways to know, or come to know,
describe appropriate behaviour around domestic and wild
new things
animals
demonstrate a beginning understanding of what rabies is identify steps of a decision making process for an
and what to do if bitten or scratched by an animal age-appropriate issue
give examples of animals that sometimes carry rabies define a goal, and recognize that setting a goal helps
accomplish tasks
describe actions of a responsible pet owner
Life Goals and Career Development
Students will be expected to:
RELATIONSHIP CHOICES-General Curriculum Outcome
Students will develop effective interpersonal skills that recognize interests, strengths and skills of self
demonstrate responsibility, respect and caring in order
demonstrate an awareness of the ways in which
to establish and maintain healthy interactions.
people perform responsibilities in the community,
including paid, and unpaid
Specific Curriculum Outcomes
Volunteerism
Understanding and Expressing Feelings
Students will be expected to:
Students will be expected to:
describe ways people volunteer in the school and in
recognize and demonstrate various ways to express feelings
the community
identify physiological responses to feelings select and perform volunteer tasks in the classroom
identify positive and negative feelings associated with
stress/change
HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1 13
--- PAGE 17 ---
Notes:
HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1 15
--- PAGE 18 ---
16 HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1
--- PAGE 19 ---
WELLNESS CHOICES
PEI Specific Curriculum Outcomes
Personal Health
Students will be expected to
• describe the health benefits of physical
activity (W-1.1)
(cid:127) demonstrate positive hygiene and health care
habits (W-1.2)
(cid:127) identify the specific physical changes that
occur during early childhood (W-1.3)
Safety and Responsibility
Students will be expected to
(cid:127) identify symbols and safety rules for (cid:127) describe appropriate behavior around
hazardous household products (W-1.6) domesticated and wild animals (W-1.11)
(cid:127) describe actions to use in unsafe or abusive (cid:127) demonstrate a beginning understanding of what
situations (W-1.7) rabies is and what to do if bitten or scratched by
an animal (W-1.12)
(cid:127) describe fire safety behaviors and burn
injury prevention (W-1.8) (cid:127) give examples of animals that sometimes
carry rabies (W-1.13)
(cid:127) describe appropriate safety behaviors in and
around a school building and on and around (cid:127) describe actions of a responsible pet owner
a school playground (W-1.9) (W-1.14)
(cid:127) demonstrate how to seek emergency help
using 911 (W-1.10)
HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1 17
○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○
(cid:127) identify physical characteristics that make
themselves both similar to and different from
others (W-1.4)
(cid:127) recognize the importance of basic healthy
nutritional choices to well-being of self (W-1.5)
--- PAGE 20 ---
WELLNESS CHOICES
GCO: Students will make responsible and informed choices to maintain health and to promote safety for
self and others.
Outcomes Elaborations-Strategies for Learning and Teaching
Students will be expected to Personal Health
(cid:127) describe the health benefits of Get Ready
physical activity (W-1.1)
(cid:127) As a class, make a list of sports that students enjoy
(cid:127) Add other types of physical activites to the list
(cid:127) On flip chart paper, post “Move, Move, Move Your Body.”
(Appendix) Sing together.
Apply
Brainstorm how physical activity can affect health. For example, if you
are physically active you may:
- get sick less often - be able to stay awake longer
- have more energy - be a better athlete
- be stronger - be able to play harder
- be a better learner - have brighter eyes
- feel calmer and happier
(cid:127) Encourage students to broaden their understanding of physical
activity and identify the many opportunities they have to be
physically active throughout the day. Discuss ways to make
physical activity a regular part of their lives and emphasize that
activites should:
- be fun
- include variety
(cid:127) demonstrate positive hygiene Get Ready
and health care habits (W-1.2)
(cid:127) Brainstorm health-care habits that help you feel clean and
healthy. Post this list.
(cid:127) As a class, compile a top ten list of reasons to have good health
care habits (see list in W-1.1 above)
(cid:127) Do a K-W-L chart (Appendix) on what students know about
germs. View a video on germs and add information to the chart
(see note column 4).
Apply
(cid:127) In pairs, role play good health care and hygiene habits from
the class list.
(cid:127) Make a list of the ways germs are spread from person to person
(through the air, through sneezing, through hand to hand
contact, by sharing drinking or eating dishes)
(cid:127) For each way germs are spread, discuss at least one way people
can stop or limit the spread (using tissues, washing hands, not
sharing personal items)
(cid:127) Review Student Information Master: Wash Your Hands
18 HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1
--- PAGE 21 ---
WELLNESS CHOICES
GCO: Students will make responsible and informed choices to maintain health and to promote safety for
self and others.
Tasks for Instruction and/or Assessment Resources/Notes
Paper and Pencil W-1.1
(cid:127) Draw a picture of three physical activities that you enjoy doing. Move, Move, Move Your Body
Student Song Sheet (Appendix)
Journal
(cid:127) Finish these statements with words or pictures:
- “Physical activity is good for me because . . .”
- “To get more active I will . . . “
Paper and Pencil
(cid:127) Draw a picture that shows three health benefits of physical
activity.
W-1.2
Literature Support Resources
Brushing Well
Performance
(cid:127) Working in pairs, prepare a 30-second public service ad for:
- how to brush your teeth, or
Student Information Master:
- how to wash your hands
Wash Your Hands (Appendix)
Videotape performances and play them back for discussion.
Teacher Background:
Paper and Pencil
Kinds of Microbes (Appendix)
(cid:127) Draw a picture of the single best way to stop the spread of
germs. (Answer: Washing hands regularly and thoroughly) Other Suggested Resources
Display these around the school.
Bill Nye the Science Guy’s Great Big Book
of Tiny Germs (Book) - Provincial Library
Keeping Clean (Video) - Provincial Library
Guest Speaker - Public Health Nurse
Please Note:
The information and resources that are
included about germs are not the focus
of outcome W-1.2 but they may help
you address it.
CIT Outcomes Link
Inspiration 7.5 Software can be used for
brainstorming activities.
Science Safety Binder (Grade 1)
HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1 19
--- PAGE 22 ---
WELLNESS CHOICES
GCO: Students will make responsible and informed choices to maintain health and to promote safety for
self and others.
Outcomes Elaborations-Strategies for Learning and Teaching
Students will be expected to Personal Health
(cid:127) identify the specific physical Get Ready
changes that occur during early
(cid:127) Invite students to bring in baby photos of themselves. Display
childhood (W-1.3)
on the board and label each photo with a number. Guess the
identity of each baby and discuss how that person has
physically changed. (This should be a voluntary activity.)
Apply
(cid:127) As a class, complete a Venn diagram illustrating the ways
children are physically the same as when they were babies and
the ways they were different. Consider height, weight, hair,
teeth and things you can do now, such as walking and talking.
(cid:127) Discuss the advantages of these physical changes. Are there
disadvantages?
20 HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1
--- PAGE 23 ---
WELLNESS CHOICES
GCO: Students will make responsible and informed choices to maintain health and to promote safety for
self and others.
Tasks for Instruction and/or Assessment Resources/Notes
Journal
(cid:127) Draw a picture of yourself and show three ways you’ve changed Other Suggested Resources
since you were a baby. Label these changes on your drawing.
When I Was Little
HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1 21
--- PAGE 24 ---
WELLNESS CHOICES
GCO: Students will make responsible and informed choices to maintain health and to promote safety for
self and others.
Outcomes Elaborations-Strategies for Learning and Teaching
Students will be expected to Personal Health
(cid:127) identify physical characteristics Get Ready
that make themselves both
(cid:127) Discuss and define the concept of physical characteristics. Use
similar to and different from
examples to illustrate the concept.
others (W-1.4) Ì
(cid:127) Brainstorm physical characteristics that are similar for all or
most students in the class; for example, two eyes, two hands.
(cid:127) List physical characteristics that are different; for example, eye
color, hand size.
Apply
(cid:127) Design a simple survey to gather information about the physical
characteristics of class members. Use pictures, symbols, numbers
and checkmarks to record your information.
(cid:127) Collect data and display on graphs.
(cid:127) Discuss the benefits of people being physically similar to one
another. For example, you could share clothing, and desks would
fit everyone.
(cid:127) Discuss the benefits of people being physically different from one
another.
(cid:127) recognize the importance of Get Ready
basic healthy nutritional
(cid:127) Discuss the concept of variety and why it is important to
choices to well-being of self
choose different kinds of food. For example, variety allows you to
(W-1.5)
get all the nutrients you need to stay healthy. The Literature
Support Resources may be used to assist students in recognizing a
variety of healthy choices.
(cid:127) As a class, brainstorm a list of favorite foods that might be eaten
for breakfast. Sort foods into “healthy/most-of-the-time” and “not-
so-healthy/sometimes” categories. (The School Healthy Eating
Toolkit - Section 1)
(cid:127) Discuss the advantages of eating more food from the healthy
category. For example, your energy lasts longer, you feel better,
and you learn better.
Apply
(cid:127) Make a class top ten list of reasons to start the day with a
healthy breakfast.
(cid:127) Discuss how our bodies feel if we skip breakfast. For example, we
may get a headache, be tired, be shaky or weak, be unable to
concentrate, or be grumpy.
(cid:127) As a class, discuss the ways water and other fluids keep our bodies
healthy (See Teacher Background/Appendix and The School
Healthy Eating Toolkit - Section 6)
(cid:127) Develop a plan to encourage all students in class to drink water
througout the school day.
22 HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1
--- PAGE 25 ---
WELLNESS CHOICES
GCO: Students will make responsible and informed choices to maintain health and to promote safety for
self and others.
Tasks for Instruction and/or Assessment Resources/Notes
Paper and Pencil
(cid:127) Make a drawing showing two ways you are physically similar to
c.a.r.e kit - Message Card #1:
a friend and two ways you are physically different.
Everyone has a body
Three Raindrops and related activities.
I’m similar to I’m different from Cross-curricular link -
Math Data Management and Probability
(Appendix)
Paper and Pencil Literature Support Resources
(cid:127) Design a page of healthy breakfast food to feature in the next The Meat and Protein Group
class/school newsletter.
The Grain Group
(cid:127) Draw and label five “healthy or most-of-the-time” foods for Fats, Oils, and Sweets
breakfast. Drinking Water
Eating Right
Presentation
The Dairy Group
(cid:127) Design a mini-poster showing why it’s important to drink water The Vegetable Group
everyday.
The Fruit Group
(cid:127) Design paper badges to be awarded when children show a
willingness to try unfamiliar foods. The badges can read, “I tried The School Healthy Eating Toolkit
it!”
Teacher Background Notes (Appendix)
HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1 23
--- PAGE 26 ---
WELLNESS CHOICES
GCO: Students will make responsible and informed choices to maintain health and to promote safety for
self and others.
Outcomes Elaborations-Strategies for Learning and Teaching
Students will be expected to Personal Health
(cid:127) identify symbols and safety Get Ready
rules for hazardous household
(cid:127) As a class, read Safety First to begin to address the aspects of our
products (W-1.6)
lives where we need to be concerned about safety.
(cid:127) Use an Idea Builder (Appendix) to discuss and define the term
hazardous.
(cid:127) Display a variety of household product containers (empty and
cleaned) so students can see the hazardous label. (See Student
Information Master.)
Apply
(cid:127) As a class, create a list of situations in which hazardous materials
are used at home. For example, situations such as cleaning the
stove and getting rid of ants could be used.
(cid:127) Discuss how hazardous materials can affect your health if you:
- breathe fumes
- spill toxic liquids on your skin or in your eyes
- eat or drink a poisonous substance
(cid:127) Review the shapes and symbols in Student Information Master:
Is It Safe?
(cid:127) Discuss basic safety rules for household substances including the
following:
1. Ask a grown-up before eating or drinking anything.
2. Don’t play with household substances.
3. Tell a grown-up if you find poison.
4. Call 911 if you think somone has been poisoned.
24 HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1
--- PAGE 27 ---
WELLNESS CHOICES
GCO: Students will make responsible and informed choices to maintain health and to promote safety for
self and others.
Tasks for Instruction and/or Assessment Resources/Notes
Interview Literature Support Resources
(cid:127) Interview your parent about hazardous products in your home. Safety First
Create ID labels for these.
Idea Builder (Appendix)
Presentation
(cid:127) Invite the school custodian to visit your class and talk about Student Information Master:
how and when hazardous materials in your school are used and Is it safe? (Appendix)
stored safely.
Other Suggested Resources
Formal / Informal Observation
Poisons Make You Sick - (Book)
(cid:127) Discuss: by Dorothy Chlad (Provincial Library)
- “What should you do if you find a poison?”
- “What should you do if you think another child has eaten or
Children and Poisons
taken a drink of a hazardous product?”
Children are at a significantly greater
risk from poisoning exposure and death
than adults because they are smaller,
have faster metabolic rates and are less
able to physically handle toxic
chemicals.
In addition, their natural curiosity and
desire to put things in their mouths
increases their risk.
School Custodian - Guest Speaker
Poison Info
1-800-565-8161
(ate one sick one)
mnemonic device
Science Safety Binder (Grade 1)
HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1 25
--- PAGE 28 ---
WELLNESS CHOICES
GCO: Students will make responsible and informed choices to maintain health and to promote safety for
self and others.
Outcomes Elaborations-Strategies for Learning and Teaching
Students will be expected to Safety and Responsibility
(cid:127) describe actions to use in unsafe Get Ready
or abusive situations (W-1.7)
(cid:127) As a class, complete a T-Chart for what a safe situation looks
and feels like. Do the same for an unsafe situation. Discuss and
compare the differences. Find examples of each.
Apply
(cid:127) Describe an unsafe situation, such as the following, to the class:
- Willy and Lee are playing in the park after school and see
two teenagers smashing glass bottles on the park bench.
- Lou and Boyce are walking home from school and find a
package of matches and firecrackers.
- Nolan and Jo see two children from their class teasing a big
dog on the school field.
- A man at the playground offers to give you and your friends
a ride home.
Discuss things you could do in each situation. Compile a class
list of strategies. For example:
- Say no. - Stay calm.
- Yell for help. - Tell the person this is not okay.
- Tell a trusted adult. - Get another person’s attention.
- Move toward a safer place.
(cid:127) describe fire safety behaviors Get Ready
and burn injury preventions
(cid:127) Brainstorm fire safety rules for the home. Post the chart. Provide
(W-1.8)
each student with three sticky dots to mark the three rules they
think are the most important. Discuss.
(cid:127) Bring a telephone directory to class. Locate and review the
Emergency Directory page with students.
Apply
(cid:127) What causes the most burn injuries in the home? (Hot Tap Water)
(cid:127) What is the best treatment? (Cool the burn with cool water for 10-
15 minutes.)
(cid:127) What do you do when a smoke alarm sounds? (Get out quickly
and report the fire.)
(cid:127) Review the information in Student Information Master:
Fire Safety. (Appendix)
26 HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1
--- PAGE 29 ---
WELLNESS CHOICES
GCO: Students will make responsible and informed choices to maintain health and to promote safety for
self and others.
Tasks for Instruction and/or Assessment Resources/Notes
Pencil and Paper
(cid:127) Divide a page into three and draw a picture of three different
c.a.r.e. kit
actions you can take in an unsafe situation.
Science Safety Binder (Grade 1)
In an unsafe situation, I can:
(Appendix)
Presentation Literature Support Resource
(cid:127) Complete a fire escape plan with your family. Show two ways to Fire Fighters
get out of each room. Draw a meeting place outside the home. (Life Learning Choices Package)
Student Information Master:
Performance Fire Safety (Appendix)
(cid:127) Ask a parent to help you test the smoke alarms in your home.
Teacher Background Notes (Appendix)
(cid:127) On the count of three, pretend your shirt is on fire. As you do Fire and Burn Prevention
the three steps to put out the fire, say the key words aloud.
(Stop, Drop, Roll)
Invite a firefighter to speak to the class.
HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1 27
--- PAGE 30 ---
WELLNESS CHOICES
GCO: Students will make responsible and informed choices to maintain health and to promote safety for
self and others.
Outcomes Elaborations-Strategies for Learning and Teaching
Students will be expected to Safety and Responsibility
(cid:127) describe appropriate safety Get Ready
behaviors in and around a
(cid:127) Read aloud and discuss a book about strangers.
school building and on and
(cid:127) Discuss handouts. (Appendix)
around a school playground
(W-1.9)
Apply
(cid:127) Brainstorm situations in the classroom that could be unsafe.
Discuss ideas for turning these situations into safe situations.
For example: by using tools, toys and furniture properly; by
asking the teacher if you are unsure how to use something; or
by walking instead of running.
(cid:127) Brainstorm and discuss safety rules for a number of typical
situations, such as:
- crossing the street
- waiting for a parent to pick you up after school
- walking home from school.
(cid:127) Discuss the general safety rules that could apply to all of the
situations. For example:
- Stay on the sidewalk or a path.
- Walk with a friend.
- Don’t talk to strangers.
- Keep your eyes open for cars and other traffic.
(cid:127) Use the safety rules to role-play situations such as the following.
- You are waiting outside the school for your parent to
pick you up. Another parent sees you there and says, I’ll drive you
home.” What do you do?
- You and a friend are playing in the playground and you find a
loony on the ground. Your friend says, “Let’s go to the store and
get a treat.” What do you do?
(cid:127) demonstrate how to seek Get Ready
emergency help using 911
(cid:127) Discuss the questions, “What can you do when you’re in trouble
(W-1.10)
or have a problem and who are the people you can rely on for
help?”
(cid:127) Discuss the concept of support network and emergency.
(cid:127) Brainstorm appropriate situations in which you should call 911.
(cid:127) Brainstorm situations when calling 911 is not appropriate.
Lessons and activities outlining 911 expectations for grade 1 are
in the appendix. Students will know how and be able to:
(cid:127) recall the 9-1-1 emergency number and their home phone
number.
(cid:127) locate phones they could use to call 9-1-1 at home, at school,
and in the community.
(cid:127) recognize and respond to situations that require emergency
help.
(cid:127) describe the steps involved in calling 9-1-1.
(cid:127) state their civic address (number, street name, community).
28 HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1
--- PAGE 31 ---
WELLNESS CHOICES
GCO: Students will make responsible and informed choices to maintain health and to promote safety for
self and others.
Tasks for Instruction and/or Assessment Resources/Notes
Presentation Literature Support Resource
(cid:127) Create a class display with the heading I am safe because . . . Signs All Around
Students can draw pictures of safe behaviors and the teacher can
write a caption describing that behavior. For example:
Ready, Set, Go (Appendix)
- I walk in the hallways.
- I keep my hands and feet to myself. Traffic Sign Savvy (Appendix)
- I look both ways before I cross the street.
Other Suggested Resources
The Berenstain Bears Learn About Strangers
Science Safety Binder (Grade 1)
Invite a guest speaker (e.g., crossing guard)
Literature Support Resources
Presentation
911 Activities (Appendix)
(cid:127) Create a paper doll chain and label each doll to represent one
person in your support network. 911 Video (1 per school)
911 Flashcard Program -
Performance
(PEI 911 Administration Office - 368-4073)
(cid:127) Using disconnect, or toy phones, role-play calling 911 to report
Invite guest speaker
emergency situations.
(e.g., firefighter, police officer)
HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1 29
--- PAGE 32 ---
WELLNESS CHOICES
GCO: Students will make responsible and informed choices to maintain health and to promote safety for
self and others.
Outcomes Elaborations-Strategies for Learning and Teaching
Students will be expected to
Safety and Responsibility (Cont’d)
(cid:127) describe appropriate behavior Get Ready
around domestic and wild
(cid:127) Discuss the “Three Times Rule” before approaching a pet.
animals (W-1.11)
- Ask parents if it’s okay.
- Ask owner if it’s okay.
- Ask pet by allowing it to smell your hand.
(cid:127) demonstrate a beginning Invite a veternarian, local public health nurse or PEI Humane
understanding of what rabies is Society representative to come to class to speak about being safe
and what to do if bitten or
around animals.
scratched by an animal
(W-1.12)
(cid:127) give examples of animals that
sometimes carry rabies (W-1.13)
(cid:127) describe actions of a Get Ready
responsible pet owner (W-1.14)
(cid:127) Invite students to bring in photos of their pets. As a class,
make a list of the ways pet owners keep their pets clean and
healthy.
(cid:127) Read aloud and discuss A Dog for You.
30 HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1
--- PAGE 33 ---
WELLNESS CHOICES
GCO: Students will make responsible and informed choices to maintain health and to promote safety for
self and others.
Tasks for Instruction and/or Assessment Resources/Notes
Presentation
(cid:127) Have students cut out pictures of a variety of animals and sort Rabies Information (Appendix)
them into the following categories: pets, barnyard animals and (Send home Parent Communication Sheets)
wild animals.
Activities / Appendix
Informal / Formal Observation
(cid:127) Read “Old MacDonald Had a Farm” and categorize the animals
Invite guest speaker
into various groups, eg. possible pets, barn animals.
(e.g., veterinarian, public health nurse,
PEI Humane Society representative)
Presentation
(cid:127) Create a list of pets that the children in class have or that family
Other Suggested Resources
relatives or friends have. Then encourage the children to create a
list of local wild animals. Have the children create a poster of Old MacDonald Had a Farm
animals they should not approach.
Science Safety Binder (Grade 1)
Performance
(cid:127) Encourage students to create a play and act out what they Rabies is a dangerous disease for both
should do if they were scatched or bitten by an animals. (Tell an animals and people. Rabies is spread by
adult, wash the bite or scratch with soap and water right away, being bitten, scratched, or licked by an
explain what the animal looked like and where it was located.) animal that has rabies. Rabies is life
threatening for people, so they must be
treated immediately. Rabies is always fatal
in animals that are not vaccinated.
Presentation
(cid:127) Find, cut out and paste pictures of animals into a poster Wild animals that can carry the rabies
showing which “domestic” and “wild” animals can carry rabies. virus in our province are raccoons,
(Animals - appendix). coyotes, skunks, foxes, and bats. Dogs,
cats, cows and other farm animals can
get rabies unless they receive special
medicine called a rabies vaccination.
Birds, fish and reptiles such as snakes
and lizards, cannot get rabies.
Cross-curriculum link - Science
Characteristics of Living Things
Paper and Pencil Literature Support Resources
A Dog For You
(cid:127) Complete “A Responsible Pet Owner” booklet. (Appendix)
Activity/Appendix
HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1 31
--- PAGE 34 ---
32 HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1
--- PAGE 36 ---
Notes:
HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1 33
--- PAGE 37 ---
RELATIONSHIP CHOICES
34 HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1
--- PAGE 38 ---
RELATIONSHIP CHOICES
PEI Specific Curriculum Outcomes
Understanding and Expressing Feelings
Students will be expected to
• recognize and demonstrate various ways to (cid:127) identify positive and negative feelings
express feelings (R-1.1) associated with stress/change (R-1.3)
(cid:127) identify physiological responses to feelings (cid:127) compare and contrast positive and negative
(R-1.2) nonverbal communication and associated
feelings (R-1.4)
HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1 35
○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○
Interactions
Students will be expected to
(cid:127) identify characteristics of being a good (cid:127) demonstrate age appropriate ways to resolve
friend (R-1.5) conflict with limited assistance (R-1.7)
(cid:127) explain how personal behaviors and attitudes
can influence the feelings and actions of others
(R-1.6)
○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○
Group Roles and Processes
Students will be expected to
(cid:127) work cooperatively with a partner (R-1.8) (cid:127) recognize and accept individual differences
within groups and families (R-1.9)
--- PAGE 39 ---
RELATIONSHIP CHOICES
GCO: Students will develop effective interpersonal skills that demonstrate responsibility, respect and
caring in order to establish and maintain healthy interactions.
Outcomes Elaborations–Strategies for Learning and Teaching
Students will be expected to Understanding and Expressing Feelings
(cid:127) recognize and demonstrate Get Ready
various ways to express feelings
(cid:127) Brainstorm a list of common feelings. Record on chart paper
(R-1.1) and post in classroom.
(cid:127) Add word balloons with words you might say when you are
expressing one of those feelings.
(cid:127) identify physiological responses Get Ready
to feelings (R-1.2)
(cid:127) Your body tells you things all day long. Think about how
your body says:
- “I am sleepy.” (by yawning)
- “This is funny.” (by laughing)
- “I am hungry.” (with tummy growling)
- “I am cold.” (by shivering or getting goosebumps)
- “I am happy.” (by smiling)
(cid:127) Have students act out a message your body sends. Have the
class guess the message.
Apply
(cid:127) Draw an outline of a body. On chart paper or on the
blackboard brainstorm and label possible effects of a particular
feeling on the body.
When I feel scared
wide eyes loud voice
fast heart beat
shaky knees
(cid:127) Discuss how different people may have different responses to
feelings. For example, some people cry when they are excited and
some people laugh. Your body may respond differently to the
same feeling at different times of your life.
(cid:127) Discuss how your body works with you to be a good learner.
- show listening (eye contact, head nodding, hand and feet still)
- help you be a neat writer (sit up straight, feet flat on floor,
eyes on paper, fingers loosely grip pencil)
- say “thank you” to another person / smile, eye contact,
clear voice, stand or sit straight
36 HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1
--- PAGE 40 ---
RELATIONSHIP CHOICES
GCO: Students will develop effective interpersonal skills that demonstrate responsibility, respect and
caring in order to establish and maintain healthy interactions.
Tasks for Instruction and/or Assessment Resources/Notes
Journal
(cid:127) Draw a picture showing three ways you expressed different Literature Support Resources
feelings this week. Write what you said in the word balloons.
When I feel Sad
Write one line under each picture to explain what you did.
When I feel Scared
How I show I am
When I feel Angry
When I feel Jealous
Feeling Poster (Appendix)
(Creative Therapy Associates)
(Appendix)
(cid:127) Use words and pictures to finish these statements:
- “My body tells me I’m happy by . . .”
- “My body tells me I’m sad by . . .”
- “My body tells me I’m scared by . . .”
- “My body tells me I’m annoyed by . . .”
- “My body tells me I’m interested by . . .”
HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1 37
--- PAGE 41 ---
RELATIONSHIP CHOICES
GCO: Students will develop effective interpersonal skills that demonstrate responsibility, respect and
caring in order to establish and maintain healthy interactions.
Outcomes Elaborations–Strategies for Learning and Teaching
Students will be expected to
Understanding and Expressing Feelings
(cid:127) identify positive and negative Get Ready
feelings associated with stress/
(cid:127) Brainstorm a list of exciting events or times over the last month
change (R-1.3)
when you had strong feelings.
Apply
(cid:127) Choose one of the events from the list and think about all the
feelings you might experience during an event such as this.
(cid:127) Discuss the term stress.
(cid:127) Use a chart to make a list of common stresses a grade 1 student
might experience (e.g., fire drills, show and tell, Christmas
concert). Decide if the stress is positive or negative. If you can’t
decide or if it could fit into both categories, put it in the
interesting column.
Positive Negative Interesting
(cid:127) compare and contrast positive Get Ready
and negative nonverbal
(cid:127) Discuss the question, “What are some things we do to show
communication and associated
people that we like them or love them?” Categorize responses by
feelings (R-1.4)
grouping together all the responses about touching.
Apply
(cid:127) Discuss how you feel when you hug or kiss someone you love, or
when someone you love hugs or kisses you.
(cid:127) Identify kinds of touches that are positive.
(cid:127) Brainstorm touches that are negative such as pushing, hitting or
punching. Discuss what negative touching looks like and how it
can make a person feel.
(cid:127) During a two day period, have students share times they have
seen or experienced positive touching. Record these on a chart.
38 HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1
--- PAGE 42 ---
RELATIONSHIP CHOICES
GCO: Students will develop effective interpersonal skills that demonstrate responsibility, respect and
caring in order to establish and maintain healthy interactions.
Tasks for Instruction and/or Assessment Resources/Notes
Paper and Pencil
(cid:127) Imagine that you have just moved to a new school and this is Stress - is the way your body and
your first day in class. You don’t know anyone and you are afraid feelings react to a pressure or change.
you’ll get lost in the school. Name some feelings you might Stress can result from a positive
have. Include at least one positive feeling. situation, such as performing in a
concert, or a negative situation, such as
having your best friend move away.
In this new situation I might feel . . .
(Appendix)
(cid:127) Draw a cartoon about positive touching. Use word balloons to c.a.r.e. kit
show what each person is saying and thought balloons to show
Message Card #2 and #3
what each person is thinking.
HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1 39
--- PAGE 43 ---
RELATIONSHIP CHOICES
GCO: Students will develop effective interpersonal skills that demonstrate responsibility, respect and
caring in order to establish and maintain healthy interactions.
Outcomes Elaborations–Strategies for Learning and Teaching
Students will be expected to
Interactions
(cid:127) identify characteristics of being Get Ready
a good friend (R-1.5)
(cid:127) As a class, read a story about friendship, such as Priscilla and
Rosy by Sharon Jennings. Discuss.
Apply
(cid:127) Use a story about friendship as a starting point for generating a
list of characteristics of a friend.
(cid:127) As a class, complete a T-chart of what a good friend looks and
sounds like.
(cid:127) explain how personal behaviors Get Ready
and attitudes can influence the
(cid:127) Think of a time over the past week when another person said
feelings and actions of others
or did something that influenced you to feel good.
(R-1.6)
(cid:127) Think of a time over the past week when another person said
or did something that made you feel hurt or angry.
Apply
(cid:127) Read Mem Fox’s Wilfred Gordon McDonald Partridge and
discuss how one person’s behavior can affect the feelings and
actions of others.
(cid:127) Make a class list of 10 ways to help other students feel
welcome in the classroom. Role-play a few strategies from
the list, such as:
- inviting someone to join you for a recess game
- offering to share something, such as crayons
- asking another person questions to show you’re interested
in his or her ideas
(cid:127) Review Student Information Master:
Twenty ways you can be a friend to others
40 HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1
--- PAGE 44 ---
RELATIONSHIP CHOICES
GCO: Students will develop effective interpersonal skills that demonstrate responsibility, respect and
caring in order to establish and maintain healthy interactions.
Tasks for Instruction and/or Assessment Resources/Notes
Paper and Pencil
Literature Support Resources
(cid:127) Make a drawing of three characteristics of a good friend. Put a
Priscilla and Rosy Consideration
star beside the drawing of one thing you want to do more of.
Friendliness Caring
Cooperation Forgiveness
A good friend is . . .
Tolerance Politeness
Sportsmanship Peacefulness
Responsibility Respect
Honesty Patience
Other Suggested Resources
(Appendix)
Sun and Moon (book)
A Little Bit of Winter (book)
Paper and Pencil Literature Support Resources
(cid:127) Draw a picture of one of the strategies from Student Information When I Care About Others
Master 5.
Wilfred Gordon MacDonald Partridge
Presentation
Other Suggested Resources
(cid:127) Design a greeting card that could have a positive influence on
Chrysanthemum (book)
the feelings and actions of another person.
Howay for Wodney Wat (book)
Paper and Pencil
Student Information Master:
(cid:127) Use drawings and key words to complete a chart showing how
Twenty Ways you can be a Friend to Others
you can influence the feelings and actions of others.
(Appendix)
Three ways I can help others have a good time at recess are:
(Appendix)
HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1 41
--- PAGE 45 ---
RELATIONSHIP CHOICES
GCO: Students will develop effective interpersonal skills that demonstrate responsibility, respect and
caring in order to establish and maintain healthy interactions.
Outcomes Elaborations–Strategies for Learning and Teaching
Students will be expected to
Interactions
(cid:127) demonstrate age-appropriate Get Ready
ways to resolve conflict with
(cid:127) Use an idea builder (W-1.6 - Appendix) to explore and define
limited assistance (R-1.7)
the concept of conflict.
(cid:127) As a class, brainstorm a list of conflicts grade 1 students may
have: - on the playground
- in the classroom
- at home
Apply
(cid:127) Read and discuss Student Information Master: Work It Out!
(cid:127) Discuss strategies for calming down, such as breathing
slowly, counting to 10 or using self-talk.
(cid:127) Present a case study showing two sides of a situation that
could result in a conflict. For example:
Suzanne - I brought my birthday money to school so I could
buy popcorn for two of my friends. I got really mad when I
heard Carl telling everybody I stole my popcorn money out
of his lunch bag. That’s not true!
Carlos - I left my lunch money inside my lunch bag on the
table by my desk. When I went to get it, the money was
gone. My friend saw Suzanne by the table. Then she had all
that money to buy popcorn. I bet she took my money. I
want it back.
(cid:127) Discuss “What might happen if Suzanne and Carlos do not
talk about this problem?”
(cid:127) Review what good listening looks like, including:
- showing you’re interested
- paying attention
- not interrupting
(cid:127) By telling another person how you feel, you can sometimes
avoid a conflict. Use these three sentence starters to help
you.
I feel . . .
When you . . .
I want . . . (tell what would make things better for you)
42 HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1
--- PAGE 46 ---
RELATIONSHIP CHOICES
GCO: Students will develop effective interpersonal skills that demonstrate responsibility, respect and
caring in order to establish and maintain healthy interactions.
Tasks for Instruction and/or Assessment Resources/Notes
Informal / Formal Observation
(cid:127) Discuss/display strategies for calming down or working out a Student Information Master:
conflict. (Student Information Master: Work It Out!) Work It Out! (Appendix)
Paper and Pencil
(cid:127) Complete the word balloons to show what you could say if
another student took your crayons without asking.
I feel
When you
I want
(Appendix)
Presentation Verbal Abuse Prevention Week
(October)
(cid:127) Design mini-posters encouraging students in your school to:
- stay calm
- use words to solve problems
- walk away
Display the posters in hallways.
Performance
(cid:127) Use role-playing situations, such as the following, to practise
telling another person how you feel.
- Your friend Tyler asks you to wait for him by the outside
door at recess. You wait for almost the whole recess and he
doesn’t show up. When you see him next recess, what will
you tell him?
- During library time, another student picks up the book you
have chosen from the table and walks to the checkout desk.
What will you say?
HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1 43
--- PAGE 47 ---
RELATIONSHIP CHOICES
GCO: Students will develop effective interpersonal skills that demonstrate responsibility, respect and
caring in order to establish and maintain healthy interactions.
Outcomes Elaborations–Strategies for Learning and Teaching
Students will be expected to
Group Roles and Processes
(cid:127) work cooperatively with a Get Ready
partner (R-1.8)
Note: Outcomes similar to R-1.8 exist in other curricula. It is
not specific to Health.
(cid:127) Use an idea builder to explore the concept of cooperation.
(cid:127) Do a think-pair-share on the advantages of working
cooperatively.
(cid:127) Use these ideas to create a top ten list of reasons to work
cooperatively with others.
(cid:127) Brainstorm a list of all the times this week you did
something cooperatively with another person
Apply
(cid:127) Use a triple T-chart to record what working cooperatively
looks, sounds and feels like.
(cid:127) recognize and accept individual Get Ready
differences within groups and
Note: Outcomes similar to R-1.9 exist in other curricula. It is
families (R-1.9)Ì
not specific to Health.
(cid:127) Read books that portray differences in individuals, groups, and
families.
(cid:127) Brainstorm a list of ways that all students in the class are
similar.
(cid:127) Brainstorm a list of ways that students may be different from
each other.
(cid:127) Discuss what would happen in school or in families if all
people were exactly alike.
44 HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1
--- PAGE 48 ---
RELATIONSHIP CHOICES
GCO: Students will develop effective interpersonal skills that demonstrate responsibility, respect and
caring in order to establish and maintain healthy interactions.
Tasks for Instruction and/or Assessment Resources/Notes
Informal / Formal Observation
(cid:127) With a partner, paint a picture by sharing one brush and one Student Activity Master:
piece of paper. Work together to decide what will be in the Rating Scale: Partner Work (Appendix)
painting, who will paint first, and what colours you will use.
Idea Builder (Appendix - W-1.6)
Paper and Pencil
(cid:127) Listen to your teacher read each statement from Student Activity
Other Suggested Resources
Master (Appendix) and circle the number that best describes
how you worked with your partner today. Just A Little Bit
CIT Outcomes Links
Concept Mapping, A4.3
Graphics A5.1, B5.1
Social, Health, Ethical E2.1, E2.2, E2.3
Paper and Pencil Literature Support Resources
(cid:127) On a chart, draw two ways that you are similar to one person in Whoever You Are
your family, and two ways you are different from that person.
Some Kids Are Deaf
How I’m similar to How I’m different from Some Kids Wear Leg Braces
Some Kids Are Blind
Some Kids Use Wheelchairs
The Family Book
Cross-curricular link - Science
(Appendix) Materials, Objects and Our Senses
Teacher Note (R-1.9)
Use gender neutral terms such as
“parents or guardians” rather than
“mothers and fathers” to promote
respect for all families.
Brainstorming Activities -
Inspiration 7.5
HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1 45
--- PAGE 49 ---
46 HEALTH EDUCATION CURRICULUM: GRADE 1