
--- PAGE 1 ---
MENTAL HEALTH
& HIGH SCHOOL
CURRICULUM GUIDE
UNDERSTANDING MENTAL HEALTH AND MENTAL ILLNESS
VERSION 3
--- PAGE 2 ---
December 2017
This is the third version of the Mental Health and High School Curriculum Guide (Guide v.3) and supports the
web based lesson plans and teaching resources found at:
https://mhlcurriculum.org/
The password is: t33nh3alth
Guide v.3 has been created by Dr. Stan Kutcher and Dr. Yifeng Wei of Dalhousie University and the IWK
Health Center. Stan Kutcher, DNS, MD, FRCPC, FCAHS, is, Professor of Psychiatry, the Sun Life Financial
Chair in Adolescent Mental Health and Director of the World Health Organization Collaborating Center at
Dalhousie University. Yifeng Wei, MEd, PhD is the Research and School Mental Health Lead of the Sun Life
Financial Chair in Adolescent Mental Health Team.
Contributing to Guide v.3 from the Sun Life Financial Chair team are: Vanessa Bruce Little, Kate Elliot, Amy
MacKay, Mina Hashish.
International expert review and contributions to Guide v.3 from: Susana Costa, Portugal; Michael Udedi, Mala-
wi; Yasutaka Ojio, Japan; Mandy Paradise, USA; Andres Sourander, Finland.
Our thanks to Andrew Baxter (Alberta Health Services) and the scores of teachers, principals and other educa-
tors who provided feedback based on their application of the second edition of this resource.
© This material is under copyright. It cannot be altered, modified or sold. It is meant for educational purposes
only and is not a guide to diagnosis or treatment. If you are concerned about a mental health problem, please
seek the advice of health professionals.
--- PAGE 3 ---
2
--- PAGE 4 ---
Table of Contents
Introduction 4
About the Guide 4
Using the Guide 5
Reviewing the Guide 8
Teacher Knowledge Update 10
Pre/Post Quiz 11
Pre/Post Quiz Answers 14
Teacher Knowledge Update 15
Student Evaluation 46
Teacher Handout 49
Part 4: Modules 50
Module 1: The Stigma of Mental Illness 51
Module 2: Understanding Mental Health and Mental Illness 67
Module 3: Information on Specific Mental Illnesses 77
Module 4: Experiences of Mental Illness and the
Importance of Family Communication 111
Module 5: Seeking Help and Finding Support 117
Module 6: The Importance of Positive Mental Health 130
Glossary 144
Other Resources 160
Publications about the Guide 163
3
--- PAGE 5 ---
Introduction
About the Guide
The Mental Health and High School Curriculum Guide (the Guide) is the only evidence-based mental health
curriculum resource that has been demonstrated to improve both teachers’ and students’ mental health literacy
through usual teacher education and application in the classroom in a variety of program evaluations and
research studies in Canada and elsewhere.*
This edition of the Guide replaces previous versions and has been rewritten with new materials added and
reflects Diagnostic and Statistical Manual V (DSM-5) nomenclature. The Guide is available online with all
components found in this book easily accessible using the password found on page 2. The online version of
the Guide can be obtained at: https://mhlcurriculum.org.
Information about how to access training programs related to the use of the Guide can be found at http://
teenmentalhealth.org/care/educators/school-mental-health-training-programs/.
In addition to the online version and supporting materials for the Guide, the website
http://teenmentalhealth.org/ provides a rich repository of materials that can be used by educators and
students alike in improving their understanding of mental health and mental disorders.
The Guide has been developed to help enhance the mental health literacy of students and targeted to be used
in grades nine and ten (ages 13 to 15 years). This is the time of the lifespan in which the diagnoses of mental
disorders begins to increase dramatically; it is thus essential that young people be able to have the knowledge,
attitudes and competencies to help themselves and others if necessary. Mental health literacy has four
components:
1) Understanding how to optimize and maintain good mental health
2) Understanding mental disorders and their treatments
3) Decreasing Stigma
4) Enhancing help-seeking efficacy (knowing when and where to get help and having the skills necessary
to promote self-care and how to obtain good care)
The Guide helps prepare students for success in each of these domains. Educators using the Guide may wish
to use additional information to supplement the resources described in the Guide or to increase their
knowledge in youth mental health. While there are many mental health resources available, we recommend
two that meet our standards of quality: the handbook “When Something’s Wrong: Strategies for Teachers”
which can be found at: http://healthymindscanada.ca/ and the classroom resource “Stop Wondering, Start
Knowing” which can be found at http://keltymentalhealth.ca.
*Reports of some of the program evaluations and research on the application of the Guide can be found online
at: http://teenmentalhealth.org/toolbox/.
4
--- PAGE 6 ---
Introduction
Using the Guide
This section provides general information about the Guide and suggestions for its classroom application.
Purpose:
The Guide is intended to be used by classroom teachers who have been trained in its application to enhance
the mental health literacy of students in grades nine and ten (ages 13 to 15).
Structure:
The Guide consists of both teacher preparation and classroom ready materials that can be easily accessed
from the web at http://teenmentalhealth.org/curriculum/ using the password found on page 2.
The steps to implement the Guide are:
Step 1) Pre/Post-Quiz
Step 2) Teacher Knowledge Update
Step 3) Student Evaluation
Step 4) Modules
Pre/Post Quiz:
The purpose of this component is to help facilitate self-study for the teacher prior to applying the Guide in the
classroom. Taking the Pre-Quiz will help you identify areas in which your knowledge base needs
enhancement. After taking the Pre-Quiz, keep a record of those questions that you have answered incorrectly.
Then read the Teacher Knowledge Update and pay particular attention to finding the information related to the
questions that you answered incorrectly. Take the Post-Quiz upon reading the Teacher Knowledge Update. If
you have answered any questions in the Post-Quiz incorrectly please return to the Teacher Knowledge Update
and review the section(s) therein that relate to the questions you answered incorrectly. Once you have
answered all Post-Quiz questions correctly please proceed to the Student Evaluation component.
Teacher Knowledge Update (Fundamental):
The purpose of this component is to provide basic information about mental health and mental disorders that
will help the teacher better apply the Guide resource in the classroom. A more comprehensive resource,
Teacher Knowledge Update (Enhanced), can be found at http://teenmentalhealth.org/curriculum/.
Student Evaluation:
The purpose of this component is to provide teachers with a ready-made classroom test that can be used as
part of or all of their evaluation of their students’ learning once the Guide (all modules) have been taught. It
includes both knowledge and attitude questions which allow for teacher evaluation of both of these important
dimensions of mental health literacy. It can be applied prior to the teaching of the Guide in the classroom and
then repeated after the end of Module Six. This evaluation procedure will allow for a robust determination of
5
--- PAGE 7 ---
Introduction
student learning by comparing scores for each student across pre-and-post-applications. Alternatively, teachers
may choose to apply the student evaluation only upon completion of the six modules and not compare pre-and
post-scores.
Modules:
The purpose of this component is to provide teachers with classroom ready lesson plans, activities and easily
accessible resources to assist them in applying the Guide. The six modules are designed to be taught in
sequence. All modules have two sections: Core Materials and Supplementary Materials. The Core Materials
are designed to be used for all students and are required to be taught in the classroom so as to achieve the
outcomes identified in the research and evaluation of this resource. The Supplementary Materials are designed
for use by students who want to spend additional time and effort to learn more about the module topic.
Teachers are encouraged to use their discretion in the introduction of the Supplementary Materials in their
classes. Teachers should familiarize themselves with BOTH the Core Materials and Supplementary Materials
and decide if and how they will introduce the Supplementary Materials in their classrooms once the Core
Materials have been taught.
Format of the modules:
As you review the modules, you will find that each one includes several key features:
• The Overview provides a summary of the module.
• The Learning Objectives lists specific understandings or competencies students should derive from
completing the modules.
• The Major Concepts section presents the central ideas that the module is designed to address.
• Teacher Background provides ideas about suggested information that should be reviewed prior to
teaching the module to enhance your understanding of the content so that you can confidently facilitate
class discussions, answer students’ questions and provide additional examples and illustrations.
• The Activities section provides details about suggested classroom application. Teachers are
encouraged to use as many of the activities in each section as possible.
• The Required Materials section provides resources needed to complete the activities in each module.
• The In Advance section provides instructions for collecting and preparing materials required to
complete the activities in the module.
• Notes to Teachers appear as sidebars. Look here for information about issues that may need to be
emphasized.
The Guide and Existing School Curriculum:
The Guide is not meant to replace existing school curriculum. It is meant to be a classroom resource applied
by usual classroom teachers that can be used within existing curriculum frameworks to enhance the mental
health literacy of both students and teachers. Research on various strategies in classroom application of the
Guide has identified that optimal results can be obtained by training teachers on how to apply the Guide in their
classrooms, teaching the Guide as part of a curriculum component (within an appropriate subject area such as
Health and Physical Education, Personal Development, Family Studies, etc.) and teaching the Guide
6
--- PAGE 8 ---
Introduction
as a block (six modules taught consecutively over a period of 8 to 12 hours). The modules were designed to
each fit into 60 minutes of classroom time. Based on feedback from teachers and students, Module 3 of the
Guide is the longest and most information intense module and may require more teaching time than other
modules. We recommend that 1.5-2, 50-minute blocks be allocated to Module 3.
Resources in the Guide:
The Guide provides the teacher with resources meant to engage the student in their learning, be interactive,
experiential, to stimulate critical thinking and personal reflection and to help stimulate a search for knowledge.
This resource includes printed materials, animated videos, PowerPoint presentations and web-downloadable
materials. Interactive teaching tips and suggestions for guided discussion are also provided.
Teachers are free to use other resources that they think will be appropriate. However, some resources are
more reliable and accurate than others, therefore we have created the “Chair Certified Resource” committee to
suggest content-valid resources for teachers to use in the classroom. These resources have undergone
extensive professional review and are known to be both up-to-date and consistent with best available scientific
knowledge. They are periodically updated and posted on the website. The developers of the Guide do realize
that there are other sources of information about mental health and mental disorders available and have
identified some credible and trustworthy websites in the section “Further Resources and Information about the
Guide”. We suggest that teachers use the Guide resources as they appear in each module and supplement
these with other materials obtained from those websites that we have identified to ensure as much as possible
that valid and appropriate information is used in the classroom.
Some of the modules lend themselves to the use of resources from outside the classroom or the
school. For example, in-school student services professionals (such as psychologists or social
workers) or health and human services professionals from community agencies (such as physicians, psycholo-
gists, social workers, substance abuse specialists, etc.) may be able to add invaluable input into what students
are learning (for example, in Module Five addressing help-seeking). In some schools, organized speakers from
credible organizations (for example, the Canadian Mental Health Organization) may be available to provide
additional inputs. Teachers choosing to employ these resources should ensure that the person addressing the
class belongs to a responsible and credible organization or institution and that the presenter understands what
the goals and expected outcomes of their presentation are meant to be.
7
--- PAGE 9 ---
Introduction
Reviewing the Guide
Module Major Concepts
Module 1: • Stigma acts as a barrier to people seeking help for mental health problems and
The stigma of mental mental illness.
illness
• Understanding mental illness and treatments can help dispel misconceptions and
stigma.
• People’s attitudes about mental illness can be positively influenced by exposure to
accurate information.
• We all have a responsibility to fight the stigma associated with mental illness.
Module 2: • Everyone has mental health regardless of whether or not they have a mental
Understanding men- illness.
tal health and mental
• The brain controls our thinking, perceptions, emotions, physical activities,
illness
behaviour and provides us with cues about how to adapt to our environment
(signaling).
• A mental illness is a health condition arising from changes in usual brain
functioning that causes that person substantial difficulty in functioning.
• Mental illnesses have complex causes that include a biological basis and are
therefore not that different from other illnesses. As with all illnesses, the sooner
people obtain effective treatment for mental illness - the better their outcomes.
• The stress response is a normal phenomenon that signals adaptation to changes
in our environment is needed.
Module 3: • All mental illnesses reflect difficulties in: thinking, perception, emotions, physical
Information on specific activities, behaviour and signaling.
mental illnesses
• The exact cause of mental illnesses is not yet known, but complex interactions
between a person’s biology and their environment are involved.
• Like illnesses that affect other parts of the body, mental illnesses are treatable and
the sooner people receive proper treatment and support, the better the outcomes.
Module 4: • Mental illnesses are diseases that affect many aspects of a person’s life.
Experiences of mental
• With appropriate support and receipt of evidence-based treatment, most people
illness
with a mental illness can function effectively in everyday life.
• Getting help early increases the chances that a person will make a full recovery
from mental illness.
• Mental illnesses, like physical illnesses, can be effectively treated.
8
--- PAGE 10 ---
Introduction
Module Major Concepts
Module 5: • There are many ways of seeking help for mental health problems and mental
Seeking help and illnesses, and resources are available within schools and within the community.
finding support
• Knowing the signs and symptoms of mental illness helps people know how to
distinguish the normal ups and downs of life from something more serious.
• Recovery from mental illness is possible when a range of supports beyond
formal treatment are available.
• Everyone has mental health that can be supported and promoted, regardless of
whether or not they also have a mental illness.
Module 6: • Positive coping strategies can help everyone maintain and enhance their mental
The importance of health.
positive mental health
• There are skills and strategies that we can learn to help us obtain and maintain
good mental health.
9
--- PAGE 11 ---
Teacher Knowledge Update
Teacher Knowledge Update (Fundamental)
This handbook is both part of this Guide resource and available separately on the www.teenmentalhealth.org
website at the direct URL: http://teenmentalhealth.org/toolbox/school-mental-health-teachers-training-
guide-english/.
It is meant to be used by classroom teachers for two purposes. The first purpose is for teachers to study the
material in the handbook before they apply the modules in their classrooms so that they can upgrade their
knowledge about mental health and mental disorders. The second purpose is that this handbook can be used
as a supplementary resource for students to use in Module Three. Teachers can make this easily available to
their students either by providing them with the website link or by photocopying the PDF and placing the hard
copy in the classroom – or both!
Remember, teachers are using this handbook to support their application of the Guide resource in their
classroom teaching. This is being done to improve the mental health literacy of students. This handbook is not
to be used to support the delivery of diagnosis or treatment recommendations for students or
parents.
The role of the teacher does not include diagnosis or treatment recommendations. It does include
teaching of mental health literacy, responding to students’/parents’ concerns by supportive listening and
referral to the most appropriate person within the school to help address those concerns (such as a
counsellor, social worker, psychologist) and providing ongoing academically appropriate support to the
student as part of the school’s integrated response to the student’s needs.
Using the Handbook for Self-Study:
Step 1: Before reading the Teacher Knowledge Update, take the self-evaluation Pre-Quiz (30
questions) and answer each question as true or false. Keep a record of the questions for which
you provided the wrong answer – to make sure that you cover those areas when you read the
Teacher Knowledge Update.
Step 2: Carefully read the Teacher Knowledge Update, paying particular attention to areas in which
your Pre-Quiz answers were not correct.
Step 3: Take the Post-Quiz (repeat of the Pre-Quiz). If you have any wrong answers in the Post-Quiz
please go back to the relevant section of the Teacher Knowledge Update and make sure you have
mastered the material there. Once you have all the answers correct you are ready to proceed to the
use of the Guide materials as found in the Modules.
The password needed to access the Modules is: t33nh3alth
Note: The Guide resource has been extensively researched (see page 166 for some recent publications)
and has demonstrated significant and substantial positive impacts on improving teachers’ and students’
knowledge and decreasing stigma. This research however is based on applying a training program for teach-
ers to take prior to applying the Guide resource in their classrooms. If your school, school board,
organization or institution would like to obtain that training please contact us at: info@teenmentalhealth.org.
10
--- PAGE 12 ---
Pre/Post Quiz
1. A phobia is an intense fear about something that might be harmful (such as heights, snakes, etc.)
a. true b. false
2. Useful interventions for adolescent mental disorders include BOTH psychological and pharmacological
treatment.
a. true b. false
3. Mental distress can occur in someone who has a mental disorder.
a. true b. false
4. Stigma against the mentally ill is uncommon in Canada.
a. true b. false
5. Substance abuse is commonly paired with a mental disorder.
a. true b. false
6. The most common mental disorders in teenage girls are eating disorders.
a. true b. false
7. The stresses of being a teenager are a major factor leading to adolescent suicide.
a. true b. false
8. Three of the strongest risk factors for teen suicide are: romantic breakup, conflict with
parents, and school failure.
a. true b. false
9. Schizophrenia is a split personality.
a. true b. false
10. A depressed mood that includes a drop in school grades and lasts for a month or longer in a teenager
is very common and should not be confused with a clinical Depression that may require professional
help.
a. true b. false
11. A Generalized Anxiety Disorder usually arises from being burned out by stressful events.
a. true b. false
11
--- PAGE 13 ---
Pre/Post Quiz
12. Diet, exercise and establishing a regular sleep cycle are all effective treatments for many mental
disorders in teenagers.
a. true b. false
13. Anorexia nervosa is very common in teenage girls.
a. true b. false
14. Bipolar Disorder is another name for manic depressive illness.
a. true b. false
15. The panic attacks that occur as part of Panic Disorder usually come “out of the blue”.
a. true b. false
16. Obsessions are thoughts that are unwanted and known to be incorrect.
a. true b. false
17. Serotonin is a liver chemical that helps control appetite.
a. true b. false
18. Mental disorders may affect between 15-20 percent of Canadians.
a. true b. false
19. Youth who have Social Anxiety Disorder do not get well with treatment.
a. true b. false
20. Depression affects about 2 percent of people in North America.
a. true b. false
21. A psychiatrist is a medical doctor who specializes in treating people who have a mental illness.
a. true b. false
22. Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is equally common in boys and girls.
a. true b. false
12
--- PAGE 14 ---
Pre/Post Quiz
23. A hallucination is defined as a sound that comes from nowhere.
a. true b. false
24. Panic Disorder is a type of Anxiety Disorder.
a. true b. false
25. Medications called “anti-psychotics” are helpful in treating some of the symptoms of Schizophrenia.
a. true b. false
26. A delusion is defined as seeing something that is not real.
a. true b. false
27. Lack of pleasure, hopelessness and fatigue can all be symptoms of a clinical Depression.
a. true b. false
28. Nobody with Schizophrenia ever recovers to the point where they can live a positive life.
a. true b. false
29. People with Mania may experience strange feelings of grandiosity.
a. true b. false
30. Mental disorders are psychological problems that are often caused by poor nutrition.
a. true b. false
(See answer key end of this section)
13
--- PAGE 15 ---
Pre/Post Quiz Answers
1. True 16. True
2. True 17. False
3. True 18. True
4. False 19. False
5. True 20. False
6. False 21. True
7. False 22. False
8. False 23. False
9. False 24. True
10. False 25. True
11. False 26. False
12. False 27. True
13. False 28. False
14. True 29. True
15. True 30. False
14
--- PAGE 16 ---
Teacher
Knowledge
Update
© This material is under copyright. It cannot be altered, modified or sold. It is meant for educational purposes only and is not a guide to
diagnosis or treatment. If you are concerned about a mental health problem please seek the advice of health professionals.
15
--- PAGE 17 ---
What are Mental Disorders?*
* Please note that we will use the phrases mental disorder and mental illness as synonyms.
Here’s what we know about mental disorders:
• Disturbances of emotion, thinking, and/or behaviour
• Derive from perturbations in the function of various brain circuits
• Arise from a complex interplay between genetic and environmental factors
• May range in intensity
• Lead to functional impairment (interpersonal, social, vocational, etc.)
• Respond to evidence-based treatments provided by trained professionals
Mental disorders are not:
• The consequence of poor parenting or bad behaviour
• The result of personal weakness or deficits in personality
• The manifestation of malevolent spiritual intent
• Caused by poor nutrition
• Poverty or lifestyle choices
How is the brain involved?
• Everything that a person does, feels, thinks or experiences involves the functioning of their brain
• Most things a brain does depends on many different parts of the brain working together in a network
• The brain is made up of cells, connections amongst the cells and various neurochemicals
• The neurochemicals provide a means for the different parts of the brain to communicate
The Functions of the Brain
Behaviour
Thinking or
Cognition
Perception Physical or
or Sensation Somatic
Signaling
Emotion or
(being responsive and
Feeling
reacting to the environment)
16
--- PAGE 18 ---
What happens inside the brain when it is not functioning effectively?
• A specific part of the brain that needs to be working in a specific manner is not working well
• A specific part of the brain that needs to be working in a specific manner is working in the wrong way
• Brain pathways that help different parts of the brain communicate are not working as they should
How does the brain show it’s not working well?
• If the brain is not working properly, one or more of its functions will be disturbed
• Disturbed functions that a person directly experiences (such as sadness, sleep problems, etc.) are
called symptoms
• Disturbed functions that another person sees (such as overactivity, withdrawal, etc.) are called signs
• Both signs and symptoms can be used to determine if the brain may not be working well
• The person’s usual life or degree of functioning is disrupted because of these signs and symptoms
Mental disorders are associated with disturbances in six primary domains of brain function:
• Thinking
• Perception
• Emotion
• Signaling
• Physical
• Behaviour
Each of these brain functions is the result of millions of cells (neurons) communicating with each other through
various circuits, using various chemical messengers called neurotransmitters (e.g. serotonin, dopamine, etc.).
When the brain is not functioning properly in one or more of its six domains, and the person experiences
problems that interfere with their life in a significant way, these circuits are disrupted and the person may
develop the signs and symptoms of a mental disorder.
Mental disorder are characterized by perturbations in these brain functions, but not all changes in these
functions signify a mental disorder. For example, negative emotions are a characteristic of many mental
disorders, but most negative emotions are not the result of a mental disorder. Some can be a normal or
expected response to the environment – for example: grief when somebody dies or acute worry, sleep
problems and emotional tension when faced with a natural disaster such as a hurricane.
Mental Disorder? Yes, no, maybe.
Understanding how to differentiate a mental disorder from the usual “slings and arrows of outrageous fortune”
is a core mental health literacy competency. This is discussed in the next section below and also repeated in
the “Definitions” section of Module 2.
In the following diagram we can see the inter-relationship of different mental health states, discussed in more
details below. They are unique states with different but related characteristics. On the right side of the figure
are the various states and on the left side are the words that more properly describe each state. It is essential
that our language be clear and convey what we intend it to mean. Using the word Depression when we mean
upset is confusing and unhelpful in advancing understanding and communication.
17
--- PAGE 19 ---
The Inter-Relationship of Mental Health States: Language Matters
Depression Mental Disorder/Illness
Heartbroken, sorrowful,
Mental Health Problem
demoralized, grieving,
mournful, despairing
Upset, annoyed, sad, unhappy, disappointed,
disgusted, angry, bitter, blue, down, sorry,
glum, forlom, disconsolate, distressed, Mental Distress
despondent, dejected, pessimistic
Pensive, thoughtful No Distress, Problem
or Disorder
Check out Dr. Kutcher’s video blog, The Inter-Relationship of Mental Health States: Language Matters at:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LsowyMnqCRs&t=1s
Mental Health
There are many different definitions of mental health. Some are more clear and helpful than others. They
all try to capture one important thing. That is, that a healthy brain is what gives us mental health. The brain
is an important part of the body and the body and brain are linked. It is really not possible to consider them
separately. We know that what is good for your body will be good for your brain as well, and vice-versa. Here is
a definition that is clear and useful:
“Mental health is a state of successful performance of mental function, resulting in
productive activities, fulfilling relationships with people and the ability to change and
cope with adversity.”
– Surgeon General USA, (1999)
Basically, mental health means having the capacity to be able to successfully adapt to the challenges that
life creates for people. These challenges are both positive and negative. In order to adapt to them our brains
need to apply all of their capacities of: emotions, cognition/thinking, signaling functions and behaviours. Our
brains learn how to apply these capacities over time and as we grow and develop we are able to take on
more and more challenges and become successful in dealing with them. This is because we have faced these
challenges and learned to deal with them.
Sometimes people forget that negative emotions are a part of good mental health. Crying, feeling sad, getting
annoyed or angry, etc. are all normal responses to life challenges. So are negative thoughts such as: “this is
18
--- PAGE 20 ---
too hard for me” or “I am not a good person” or “people don’t like me”. So are negative behaviours, such as
yelling at somebody or avoiding a situation that makes us feel stressed. It does not mean that we don’t have
good mental health just because we feel stressed. Indeed, being able to identify stress and learn how to
successfully overcome it in a way that solves the problem causing it is fundamental to having good mental
health.
For example: feeling stressed about writing an examination could lead to a negative behaviour – such as
going out to party with friends to drink and “forget” about the stress. Or it could lead to a neutral behaviour –
such as going for a run or meditating to “release” the stress but not studying for the exam. But if that is your
entire adaptive response you likely will not do well on your exam. The important coping strategy that your
stress response should be eliciting from you here is to study or to get help from your instructor to assist you
in understanding something that you may not know very well. If you add this coping strategy to your stress
“releasing” activity you will be much more likely to succeed and that is a sign of good mental health. There will
be more information on this important topic in Module 6.
Key Point:
It is important to understand that everyone has mental health just like everyone has physical health. And,
just like a person can have good physical health and at the same time have a physical illness, people can
have good mental health and a mental illness at the same time.
To understand mental health it is necessary to understand the three related components of mental health:
mental distress, mental health problems and mental disorder. These are illustrated in the triangle diagram.
Mental Distress
Mental distress is the inner signal of anxiety or “stress” that a person has when something in their environment
is demanding that they adapt to a challenge (for example: writing a test, giving a presentation in front of the
class, asking a person to go out on a date, failing to make a school sports team, etc.). This is called a “stress
signal” or “stress response”. A stress response has different components to it: emotions/feelings (such as
worrying, unhappiness, feeling energized, annoyance), cognitions/thinking (negative thoughts such as “I am
not good at anything”, “I wish I did not have to do this”, or positive thoughts such as “this is something I need
to solve”, “it may be difficult but I can do this”, “I should ask my friend for their advice”), physical symptoms
(such as stomach aches and headaches, the stomach “butterflies”) and behaviours (such as avoidance of the
situation, engagement of the challenge, positive energy, withdrawal from others, yelling at someone or helping
someone). As we can see, the stress response can have both negative and positive components! We need to
make sure we don’t always focus on the negative ones.
Everybody experiences mental distress (often called “stress”) every day. It is a part of good mental health.
It is a signal that tells us to try something new to solve the challenge we are facing. As the person who feels
distress tries to develop solutions or strategies to solve the challenges (often called “stressors”) they figure
out what works and what does not work well. Successfully dealing with the stressor (also called solving the
problem) leads to learning what strategy worked and use of that strategy in similar situations in the future. The
distress goes away once the person has successfully overcome the challenge. But the learning and skill sets
remain and are ready to be used another time. This process is called adaptation or resilience building.
Young people experiencing everyday mental distress do not require counselling - they are not “sick” and they
do not need treatment. They can learn how to manage the stress response and how to use the “stress signal”
to develop new skills. They learn these skills by trial and error by obtaining advice from friends, parents,
teachers and trusted adults and from other sources (such as the media). They can also use techniques that
are part of general health management, such as: exercise, having enough sleep, being with friends and family,
eating properly and staying away from drugs and alcohol. Sometimes what the young person tries does not
work (for example: instead of studying for an exam they go out and party with their friends, instead of getting
19
--- PAGE 21 ---
a good night’s sleep before an exam they try to stay up all night and study) and as a result their distress may
increase. But making wrong choices is part of learning how to make good choices. This is a normal part of
growing up. Allowing young people to avoid everyday mental distress, or to focus only on teaching them how
to modulate the stress response instead of how to use it to learn new skills, can have negative impacts on their
development of skills that they need to learn in order to have successful adult lives.
Mental Health Problems
Mental health problems may arise when a person is faced with a much larger stressor than usual. These
occur as an expected part of normal life and are not mental illnesses. For example: death of a loved one,
moving to a new country, having a serious physical illness, etc. When faced with these large stressors,
everyone experiences strong negative emotions (such as: sadness, grief, anger, demoralization, etc.). These
emotions are also accompanied by substantial difficulties in other domains such as: cognitive/thinking (for
example: “nothing will ever be the same”, “I don’t know if I can go on in my life”, etc.), physical (for example:
sleep problems, loss of energy, numerous aches and pains), and behavioural (for example: social withdrawal,
avoidance of usual activities, angry outbursts, etc.).
Sometimes the young person experiencing a mental health problem will exhibit noticeable difficulties in
everyday functioning - at school and outside of school. In addition to the distress management skills and
general health enhancing activities that are useful in decreasing mental distress, young people experiencing
a mental health problem will often need additional support to help them through the difficult situation or assist
them with problems in functioning (such as extra time for academic activities, time away from school to be
with their families, etc.). In such cases, this support can come from a counsellor, a religious leader, or another
person that has the skills needed to help effectively. Medical treatment (medication or psychotherapy) is
usually not necessary. The presence of a supportive adult (such as a teacher, parent or neighbour) is a key
component that can help young people deal with a mental health problem.
Mental Disorders
A mental disorder is very different from mental distress and from a mental health problem. It arises from a
complex interplay between a person’s genetic makeup and the environment in which they live or have been
exposed to at different times in their lives. A mental disorder (also called a mental illness) is a medical condition
diagnosed by trained health professionals (such as doctors, mental health clinicians, psychiatric nurses and
psychologists) using internationally established diagnostic criteria. A person with a mental disorder is best
helped by a trained health professional providing best evidence-based treatments. Mental disorders are the
result of changes that arise in usual brain function as a result of a complex interplay between a person’s genes
and environment. When a person has a mental disorder, their brain is not working as it should be.
A person with a mental disorder will experience significant, substantial and persistent challenges with
emotions/feelings (for example: Depression, panic attacks, overwhelming anxiety, etc.), cognition/thinking
(delusions, disordered thoughts, hopelessness, suicidal thoughts, etc.), physical (for example: fatigue, lethargy,
excessive movement, etc.), and behaviour (for example: school refusal and withdrawal from family and friends,
suicide attempt, poor self-care, etc.). The presence of a mental disorder signifies that an individual needs best
evidence-based interventions that may be of many different types (such as medications, psychotherapies,
social interventions, etc.), provided by appropriately trained health care providers. While interventions that
can help distress and mental health problems can also be used to help a person who has a mental illness,
and general health enhancing activities are always useful, a young person with a mental disorder requires a
degree of care above and beyond that usually provided for a mental health problem. Mental disorders require
treatment using best evidence-based care by trained health professionals (such as: mental
20
--- PAGE 22 ---
health officers, doctors, psychiatric nurses, psychologists, nurses, etc.).
And: a person can be in each of these states at the same time. For example over the course of one day, a
person can be laughing and having fun with their friends (no distress, problem or disorder), can experience
distress (lost their house key), be experiencing a mental health problem (their uncle with whom they were close
died earlier this week and they feel sad, lonely and cry), and have a mental disorder (such as Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder).
What causes mental disorders?
A variety of different influences on the brain can lead to a mental disorder. Basically there are TWO major
causes that can be independent or can interact: genetics (the effect of genes on brain development and brain
function) and environment (the effect of things outside the brain on the brain – such as infection, malnutrition,
severe trauma, etc.)
Both genetic and environmental factors exert their impact by affecting how brain cells and circuits function.
Diagnosis of Mental Disorders
Diagnosis is one of the responsibilities of a trained and regulated health professional (e.g. psychologist, family
physician, psychiatrist). It is not the professional competency of a teacher or other educator. If a teacher is
concerned that a student may have a mental disorder, the teacher should make their concerns known to the
person in the school most responsible for assessment of a student’s health state. Usually this is a counsellor,
psychologist or a school nurse.
Remember to be cognizant of the language used. If a teacher says “Mary is Depressed” or “Michael has
ADHD”, that can be considered to be assigning a diagnosis. Instead of this approach, carefully describe what
you see. For example, “Mary looks sad, is crying much of the time and is not getting her school work done” or
“Michael is getting up and down from his seat most of the time and is having difficulty sustaining his attention.”
If a student has a mental disorder, the teacher should become part of that person’s “circle of care team” and
discharge their responsibilities consistent with their professional competencies, roles and responsibilities.
Teachers are not therapists but they can be mentors, coaches and important supports.
The Human Brain: Where Mental Health Lives
Planning
Calculating
Self awareness sequencing
Judgment
Comprehension
Contemplation
Reasoning
Decoding symbols
Focusing
Paying attention
21
Memory
--- PAGE 23 ---
Mental Disorders of Cognition & Perception: Psychotic Disorders
Psychotic disorders are a group of illnesses characterized by noticeable disturbances in the capacity to
distinguish between what is real and what is not real. The person with psychosis exhibits major problems in
thinking and behaviour. These include symptoms such as delusions and hallucinations. These result in many
impairments that significantly interfere with the capacity to meet ordinary demands of life. Schizophrenia is an
example of a psychotic disorder that affects about 1% of the population.
Who is at risk for developing Schizophrenia?
Schizophrenia (SCZ) often begins in adolescence and there is usually a genetic component. A family history of
SCZ, a history of birth trauma and a history of fetal brain damage in utero increases the risk for SCZ.
Significant marijuana use may bring on SCZ in young people who are at genetic risk for the illness.
What does Schizophrenia look like?
Delusions are fixed erroneous beliefs that are held with conviction and may involve misinterpretation of
experiences. One common type of delusion is persecutory (also commonly called paranoid) in which the
person thinks they are being harmed in some way by another person, force or entity (such as God, the police,
spirits, etc.). Strongly held religious minority or cultural beliefs are not delusions.
Hallucinations are perceptions (such as hearing sounds or voices, smelling scents, etc.) that may occur in any
sensory modality in the absence of an actual sensory stimulus. They can be normal during times of extreme
stress or in sleep-like states. Occasionally they can occur spontaneously (such as a person hearing their name
called out loud) but these do not cause problems with everyday life and are not persistent. In SCZ,
hallucinations are experienced as real perceptions.
Thinking is disorganized in form and in content. For example, the pattern of speaking may not make sense to
others or what is being said may not make sense or be an expression of delusional ideas.
Behaviour can be disturbed. This can range from behaviours that are mildly socially inappropriate to very
disruptive and even threatening behaviours that may be responses to hallucinations or part of a delusion.
Self-grooming and self-care may be also compromised. Rates of suicide in SCZ can approach 10% of those
with the illness.
A young person with Schizophrenia will also demonstrate a variety of cognitive problems ranging from
difficulties with concentration to “higher order” difficulties such as with abstract reasoning and problem-solving.
Most people with Schizophrenia will also exhibit what are called “negative symptoms” which include flattening
of mood, decreased speech, and lack of motivation.
A person with Schizophrenia may exhibit delusions, hallucinations and disordered thinking (also called “positive
symptoms”) as well as negative symptoms (such as social withdrawal, lack of hygiene and motivation, etc.) at
different times during the illness.
22
--- PAGE 24 ---
What are the criteria for the diagnosis of Schizophrenia?
1. Positive symptoms (delusions, hallucinations, disorganized thinking)
2. Negative symptoms (delusions, hallucinations, disorganized thinking)
3. Behavioural disturbances (delusions, hallucinations, disorganized thinking)
4. Significant dysfunction in one or more areas of daily life (social, family, interpersonal,
schoolwork, etc.)
5. These features must last for at least 6 months during which time there must be at least one
month of positive symptoms
What can I do if it is SCZ?
A young person with SCZ will require immediate access to effective treatment – usually in a specialty mental
health program (first onset psychosis program). If a teacher suspects SCZ the most appropriate student
services provider should become involved. If concerns are shared, a referral to the most appropriate specialty
mental health provider should be made and discussion with the parents about the concerns initiated.
What do I need to watch out for?
Many young people with SCZ will demonstrate a slow and gradual onset of the illness – often over a period of
6-9 months or more. Early signs include, social withdrawal, odd behaviours, lack of attention to personal
hygiene, excessive preoccupation with religious or philosophical constructs, etc. This phase of the illness is
called the “prodrome”. Occasionally the young person suffering in the prodrome may exhibit unusual
behaviours – often in response to a delusion or hallucinations. Sometimes it may be difficult to distinguish the
early onset of SCZ (the prodrome) from other mental disorders – such as Depression or Social Anxiety
Disorder. Young people suffering from the prodrome of SCZ may also begin abusing substances – particularly
alcohol or marijuana and develop a Substance Use Disorder concurrently. Occasionally the young person may
share bizarre ideas or may complain about being persecuted by others or may appear to be responding to
internal voices. Rarely these delusions or hallucinations may be accompanied by unexpected violent acts.
Treatment for SCZ includes medications and a variety of psychological, social or vocational interventions
depending on the person’s needs. Hospitalization during acute psychotic episodes is often required.
Questions to consider asking:
Can you tell me what you are concerned about? Do you feel comfortable in school (your class)? Are you
having any problems thinking? Are you hearing or seeing things that others may not be hearing or seeing?
Mental Disorders of Emotion and Feeling: Mood Disorders
There are two major types of mood disorders: unipolar mood disorders and bipolar mood disorders. Unipolar
disorder can be a Major Depression or Dysthymic Disorder, whereas Bipolar Disorder occurs when a person
experiences cycles of Depression and Mania.
Depression
Not to be confused with the word “Depression” which is commonly used to describe emotional distress or
sadness, Depression means Clinical Depression which is a mental disorder. Here, when we refer to the clinical
condition we capitalize the letter “D”: Depression.
23
--- PAGE 25 ---
What are the different types of Depression?
There are two common kinds of clinical Depression, Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) and Dysthymic Disorder
(DD). Both can significantly and negatively impact people’s lives. They can lead to social, personal and family
difficulties as well as poor vocational/educational performance and premature death due to suicide.
Additionally, patients with other illnesses such as heart disease and diabetes have an increased risk of early
death if they are also diagnosed with Depression. This is thought to be due to the physiological effects that
Depression has on your body as well as lifestyle effects such as poor self-care, increased smoking and alcohol
consumption. Individuals with Depression usually require treatment from health professionals but in mild cases
may experience substantial improvement with strong social supports and personal counselling.
What do MDD and DD look like?
MDD is usually a life-long disorder beginning in adolescence or early adulthood and is characterized by
periods (lasting months to years) of Depressive episodes that are usually self-limiting in the early course of the
illness. The episodes may be separated by periods (lasting months to years) of relative mood stability.
Sometimes the Depressive episodes may be triggered by a negative event (such as the loss of a loved one,
severe and persistent stress such as job loss or living in a conflict zone) but often the episodes occur
spontaneously. Often there is a family history of Depression, Alcoholism, Anxiety Disorder or Bipolar Disorder.
DD is a low-grade Depression that lasts for many years. It is less common than MDD.
What is a Depressive episode?
A Depressive episode is characterized by three symptom clusters: 1. mood 2. thinking (often called cognitive)
and 3. physical (often called somatic). MDD may present differently in different cultures, particularly in the
somatic problems that people identify. The symptoms of Depression must be distinguished from other negative
emotional states such as grief. The symptoms of Depression:
• Must be severe enough to cause functional impairment (stop the person from doing what they
would otherwise be doing, or decrease the quality of what they are doing)
• Must be continuously present every day, most of the day for at least two weeks
• Cannot be due to a substance or medicine or medical illness and must be different from the person’s
usual state
These symptoms are:
Mood:
• Feeling “depressed”, “sad”, “unhappy” (or whatever the cultural equivalent of these descriptors are)
• Feeling a loss of pleasure or a marked disinterest in all or almost all activities
• Feelings of worthlessness, hopelessness or excessive and inappropriate guilt
Thinking:
• Diminished ability to think or concentrate or substantial indecisiveness
• Suicidal thoughts/plans or preoccupation with death and dying
24
--- PAGE 26 ---
Physical:
• Excessive fatigue or loss of energy (not just feeling tired)
• Significant sleep problems (difficulty falling asleep or sleeping excessively)
• Physical slowness or in some cases excessive restlessness
• Significant decrease in appetite that may lead to noticeable weight loss
Criteria:
Five of the above symptoms must be present everyday for most of the day during the same two week period;
one of the five symptoms must be either depressed mood or loss of interest or pleasure. The symptoms must
be substantial and different from the emotional, cognitive and physical challenges of everyday life.
What can I do if it is Depression?
If you are concerned that your student may have Depression, it is necessary to discuss this with the most
appropriate health services provider in your school (e.g. counsellor, psychologist). The school-based health
provider can provide counselling and support (including suggestions for self-help strategies). If the disorder is
more intense or the person is suicidal, the school counsellor should immediately refer the person to the health
professional best suited to treat the Depression. Once an intervention occurs and the young person is back at
school it is important that the teacher be part of the ongoing treatment team and help develop and address
learning needs. You may also need to continue to provide realistic emotional support.
Questions to ask:
Have you lost interest or pleasure in the things that you usually like to do? Have you felt sad, low, down or
hopeless? Are you feeling that life is not worth living? If the student answers yes to either of these, further
assessment of all of the symptoms should be conducted by the person in the school best trained to deal with
this issue.
Things to look for:
People with Depression are at an increased risk for attempting suicide. Every person with Depression
should be monitored for suicidal thoughts and plans. As a teacher you need to be aware that a Depressed
student who begins to talk about suicide needs to be referred to their health provider immediately and
your role is to bring this concern to the most appropriate, responsible professional in your school. To view
an animated video on Depression visit: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i8EPzkxAiVw&t=10s
Treatment of Depression includes evidence-based psychotherapies such as Cognitive Behavioural Therapy
and medications.
Bipolar Disorder
• Illness is characterized by cycles (episodes) of Depression and Mania
• Depressions are similar to those that occur in MCC
• Mania includes mixed mood states of euphoria and irritability
• Cycles can be frequent (daily) or infrequent (many years apart)
• During Depressive or Manic episodes the person may become psychotic
• Suicide rates are high in people with Bipolar Disorder
25
--- PAGE 27 ---
In Bipolar Disorder how is ‘Mania’ different from feeling extremely happy?
• Mood is mostly elevated or irritable but can change rapidly
• Behavioural, physical and thinking problems are present
• Significant problems in daily life because of mood
• Mood may often not reflect the reality of the environment
• Is not caused by a life problem or life event
Bipolar Disorder – what to look for:
• History of at least one depressive episode and at least one manic episode
• Rapid mood changes including irritability and anger
• Self-destructive or self-harmful behaviours – including: spending sprees, violence towards others,
sexual indiscretions, etc.
• Drug or alcohol overuse, misuse or abuse
• Psychotic symptoms including: hallucinations and delusions
A student with possible Bipolar Disorder requires immediate referral to a highly qualified mental health
services provider.
Treatment of Bipolar Disorder will include medications as well as other evidence-based interventions.
Hospitalizations for acute manic or Depressive states may be needed.
Mental Disorder of Signaling: The Anxiety Disorder
It is important to remember that anxiety is not the same thing as “stress”. Many people confuse anxiety (which
is a state of constant, severe and persistent hyper arousal not driven by danger) with the stress response (our
brain/body signals that alert about an environmental challenge we need to address). When anxiety reaches
such predominance that it interferes with a person’s function and enjoyment of life - it is called Anxiety
Disorder.
What is Generalized Anxiety Disorder?
GAD is excessive anxiety and worry occurring for an extended period of time. This persistent, excessive
anxiety and worry causes marked emotional distress, leads to many physical symptoms and causes functional
impairment.
Who is at risk for developing GAD?
GAD often begins in childhood or adolescence and there is a genetic or familial component. Once GAD is
present, the severity can fluctuate and exacerbations often occur during times of increased stress.
26
--- PAGE 28 ---
What does Generalized Anxiety Disorder look like?
Generalized Anxiety Disorder is characterized by excessive anxiety and worry about many different things.
The state of hyperarousal is constant and the worries are out of proportion to the situation or event. This
anxiety and worry must be persistent and noticeably greater than the usual socio-cultural norms. Youth with
GAD often present with physical complaints such as headaches, fatigue, muscle aches and upset stomach.
These symptoms tend to be chronic and young people may miss school or social activities because of these
physical symptoms.
How do you differentiate GAD from normal worrying?
GAD symptoms can be broken into four categories:
1) Emotions – i.e. feeling fearful, worried, tense or on guard.
2) Body responses – many different body changes including increased heart rate, sweating and
shakiness, shortness of breath, muscle tension and stomach upset.
3) Thoughts – with GAD, people are more likely to think about things related to real or
potential sources of danger and may have difficulty concentrating on anything else. An example is
thinking something bad is going to happen to a loved one.
4) Behaviours – people may engage in activities that can potentially eliminate the source of the danger.
Examples include avoiding feared situations, people or places and self-medicating with drugs or
alcohol. In GAD, the state of hyperarousal occurs when there is no real danger.
When does anxiety become a disorder?
• The state of hyperarousal is intense, persistent and excessive
• It leads to impairment or disability in work, school or social environments
• It leads to avoidance of daily activities in an attempt to lessen the anxiety
What are the criteria for the diagnosis of GAD?
1. Excessive anxiety and worry occurring for at least 6 months
2. Difficulty controlling the worry
3. The anxiety and worry are associated with 3 or more of the following: restlessness or feeling on edge,
fatigued, difficulty concentrating, muscle tension or sleep disturbance
4. Anxiety and worry are not due to substance abuse, a medical condition or a mental disorder
5. The symptoms cause marked emotional distress and significant impairment in daily functioning
What can I do if it is Generalized Anxiety Disorder?
The first thing is to identify the problem for the young person and involve the school’s student services provider
who can elicit assistance from a person knowledgeable about the problem. Some people with GAD will
experience improvements in their anxiety and functioning with supportive cognitive-based counselling. Others
may require medication. Referral to an appropriate health professional for medical attention could be
considered if the GAD is severe and if the functional impairment is extensive. For some, merely knowing that
they have GAD and receiving supportive counselling from the school-based provider may be helpful enough.
Questions to ask?
Can you tell me about your worries? Do you or others see you as someone who worries much more than they
should? Do you or others consider you to be someone who worries much more than most people do? Do you
27
--- PAGE 29 ---
have trouble “letting go of the worries”? Do you sometimes feel sick with worry? In what way? What things that
you enjoy doing or would like to do are made less enjoyable or are avoided because of the worries?
What is Social Anxiety Disorder?
Social Anxiety Disorder (sometimes called Social Phobia) is characterized by the presence of an intense fear
of scrutiny by others, which can be perceived to result in embarrassement or humiliation.
What does SAD look like?
Young people with SAD fear doing something humiliating in front of others, or of offending others. They fear
that others will judge everything they do in a negative way. They believe they may be considered to be flawed
or worthless if any sign of poor performance is detected. They may cope by trying to do everything perfectly,
limiting what they are doing in front of others and gradually withdrawing from contact with others. Youth with
SAD may experience panic symptoms in social situations. As a result they tend to avoid social situations such
as parties or school events. Some may have a difficult time attending class or may avoid going to school
altogether. Although young people with SAD recognize that their fears are excessive and irrational, they are
unable to control them and therefore avoid situations that trigger their anxiety. The presentation of SAD may
vary across cultures and although it may occur in children it usually onsets in the adolescent years. It must not
be confused with “shyness” and its intensity may wax and wane over time.
What are the criteria for diagnosis of SAD?
The following must be present for someone to have SAD:
• Marked and persistent fear of social or performance situations in which the person is exposed to
unfamiliar people; fear of embarrassment or humiliation
• Exposure to the feared situation almost always provokes marked anxiety or panic
• The person recognizes that the fear is excessive or inappropriate
• The avoidance or fear causes significant impairment in functioning and distress
• The feared social or performance situations are avoided or else endured with intense anxiety or
distress
• The symptoms are not due to a substance, medicine or general medical condition
What can I do if it is SAD?
The first step is the identification of the problem. Often, youth with SAD will have suffered for many years
without knowing the reason for their difficulties. Sometimes just informing and educating them about the
problem can be helpful. Treatment is not indicated unless the problem is causing significant functional
impairment but counselling using cognitive behavioural techniques and exposure to the anxiety-provoking
situation in the company of a counsellor may help the person better deal with their difficulties. If the disorder is
severe, referral to an appropriate healthcare provider is needed, and the counsellor can provide ongoing
support. A teacher may be able to assist in behaviour modification programs (such as getting used to a
classroom situation). If you think a student may have SAD it is important not to draw attention publically to their
difficulties but speak with them in private about what you notice – be supportive.
28
--- PAGE 30 ---
What do I need to watch out for?
Some young people with SAD will use excessive amounts of alcohol to help decrease their anxiety in social
situations. In some cases, SAD can be a risk factor for the abuse of alcohol or other substances.
Questions to ask
Do situations that are new or associated with unfamiliar people cause you to feel anxious, distressed or
panicky? When you are in unfamiliar social situations are you afraid of feeling embarrassed? What kinds of
situations cause you to feel that way? Do those feelings of embarrassment, anxiety, distress or panic stop you
from doing things you would otherwise do? What have you not been able to do as well as you would like to do
because of those difficulties?
To view an animated video on SAD visit: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kitHQUWrA7s
What is Panic Disorder?
Panic Disorder is characterized by panic attacks which are rapidly onsetting, recurrent, unexpected episodes
that include a number of frightening physical reactions, fear and irrational thoughts. The frequency and severity
of panic attacks can vary greatly and can lead to agoraphobia (fear of being in places in which escape is
difficult). Typically a panic attack comes on “out of the blue” and lasts less than 20 minutes.
Who is at risk for developing Panic Disorder?
The onset of Panic Disorder is commonly between the ages of 15-25. People who have first-degree relatives
with Panic Disorder have a much higher risk of also developing Panic Disorder themselves.
What does Panic Disorder look like?
Young people with Panic Disorder experience recurrent, unexpected panic attacks and they greatly fear having
another attack. They persistently worry about having another attack as well as the consequences of having a
panic attack. Some may fear they are ‘losing their mind’ or feel they are going to die during a panic attack.
Often they will change their behaviour to avoid places or situations that they fear might trigger a panic attack.
In time, the person may come to avoid so many situations that they become bound to their home.
What are the components of a panic attack?
The person has four of more of the following symptoms which peak within 10 minutes:
1) Palpitations, pounding heart or accelerated heart rate
2) Sweating
3) Trembling or shaking
4) Sensations of shortness of breath or smothering
5) Feeling of choking
6) Chest pain or discomfort
7) Nausea or abdominal pain
8) Feeling dizzy, unsteady, lightheaded or faint
9) Feeling of unreality or being detached from oneself
29
--- PAGE 31 ---
10) Fear of losing control or going crazy
11) Fear of dying
12) Numbness or tingling in the body
13) Chills or hot flashes
What are the criteria for Panic Disorder?
Assessing Panic Disorder involves evaluating five areas:
1) Panic attacks
2) Anticipatory anxiety
3) Panic related phobic avoidance
4) Overall illness severity
5) Psychosocial disability
For a diagnosis of Panic Disorder, a patient must have:
1) Recurrent unexpected panic attacks
2) One or more of the attacks has been followed by ≥1 month of:
- Persistent concern of having additional attacks
- Worry about the implications of the attack or its consequences
- A significant change in behaviour as a result of the attacks
3) Agoraphobia
4) Panic attacks that are not due to substance abuse, medications or a general medical condition
30 5) Panic attacks that are not better accounted for by another mental disorder
--- PAGE 32 ---
What can I do if it is a Panic Attack?
The first thing is to identify the panic attack and provide a calm and supportive environment until the attack
passes. Education about panic attacks and Panic Disorder is often very helpful and should ideally be provided
by a professional with good knowledge in this area.
Counselling or psychotherapy using cognitive behavioural methods may be of help and medications can be
used as well. The teacher’s role in helping a young person suffering from a panic disorder can also involve
assisting them in dealing with their anxieties about having another attack and also helping them with strategies
to combat avoidance of social situations. Therefore it is a good idea for a teacher to be part of the treatment
planning and treatment monitoring for a youth with Panic Disorder.
Questions to ask?
Can you describe in your own words what happens when you have one of these episodes (some people will
refer to them as “spells”)? How many of these episodes have you had in the last week? In the last month?
What do these episodes stop you from doing that you would otherwise usually do? What do you do when these
episodes occur?
Things to look for:
Youth with panic disorder are at higher risk for developing Depression. If the person appears sad or
hopeless and has suicidal thoughts, a diagnosis of Depression must also be suspected. Some young
people with Panic Disorder may also develop substance abuse problems (particularly alcohol) and
counselling around these issues is very important. To view an animated video on Panic Disorder visit:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R3S_XYaEPUs
Treatments for Anxiety Disorders include evidence-based psychotherapies and in some cases, medications.
Accommodations in school should be applied with the goal of improving function, not avoidance.
Youth with Anxiety Disorders will often use avoidance as a preferred coping strategy. Avoidance makes the
anxiety worse and limits a person’s ability to deal with it. Indeed, the basic therapeutic intervention for Anxiety
Disorders is to help the young person learn to not avoid. In the school setting, be sure that avoidance is not
enabled. If accommodations are needed they should be limited in duration and be focused on helping the
student regain function. Accommodations for an Anxiety Disorder should be part of a treatment plan designed
to restore functioning so that accommodations are no longer needed. They are a means to an end, not an end
in themselves.
Examination anxiety does not exist! There is no such thing as “examination anxiety”. There is the stress
response to taking an examination. It is normal. It is expected. It has a purpose – to prepare your students to
take the examination (or job interview or any other life task or challenge). Calling this normal stress response
“examination anxiety” creates an expectation of disorder, and creates an unecessary pathology.. In some
cases this label is used to support avoidance.
Most students experience mild to moderate degrees of examination induced stress response. They need to be
assured this is normal and has a purpose – to drive behaviours that will help achieve success. The intensity of
the response can be decreased using the box-breathing technique taught in Module 6.
31
--- PAGE 33 ---
Some students with a pre-existing Anxiety Disorder will experience an enhanced stress response to the
examination stressor. Some students who have learned to fear or avoid the examination stressor may also
experience an enhanced stress response. Avoidance of the stressor for these students is not helpful – it
actually leads to a lack of resilience and even learned helplessness. For students with an exaggerated stress
response, desensitization techniques that can be taught by a school counsellor and reinforced by the teacher
should be applied from the beginning of the school year. In addition study skill development, cognitive
reframing of the stress response from fear to preparation/excitement and the practice of stress reduction
techniques should be employed. Accommodation should be used as a step towards full participation. It is a
means to an end, not an end in itself.
Other Mental Disorders with Hyper Arousal Symptoms
What is Obsessive Compulsive Disorder?
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD) is characterized by obsessions and/or compulsions. Obsessions are
persistent, intrusive, unwanted thoughts, images or impulses that the person recognizes as irrational,
senseless, intrusive or inappropriate but is unable to control. Compulsions are repetitive behaviours which the
person performs in order to reduce anxiety associated with an obsession. Examples of these are counting,
touching, washing and checking. Both can be of such intensity that they cause a great deal of distress and
significantly interfere with the person’s daily functioning. Obsessions are different from psychotic thoughts
because the person knows that they are their own thoughts (not put inside their head by some external force)
and the person does not want to have the thoughts.
Compulsions are different from psychotic behaviours because the person knows why they are doing the activity
and can usually say why they are doing them.
Who is at risk for developing OCD?
OCD often begins in adolescence or early adulthood, although it can start in childhood. It affects everybody.
First-degree relatives of people with OCD are more likely to develop OCD.
What does OCD look like?
OCD should not be confused with superstitions or those repetitive checking behaviours that are common in
everyday life. They are also not simply excessive worries about real life issues. A person with OCD will have
significant symptoms of either obsessions or compulsions or both. These symptoms will be severe enough to
cause marked distress, are time consuming (take up more than one hour per day) and significantly interfere
with a person’s normal activities (work, school, social, family, etc.).
To view an animated video on OCD visit: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ua9zr16jC1M
32
--- PAGE 34 ---
Obsessions:
• Recurrent and persistent thoughts, impulses or images that are experienced as intrusive and not
appropriate and cause significant distress or anxiety
• These symptoms cannot be simply excessive worries about everyday life
• The person with these symptoms tries to suppress or ignore them. The person may try to neutralize,
decrease or suppress the thoughts with some other thought or action.
• The person knows that the thoughts are coming from their own mind
Compulsions:
• Repetitive behaviours (such as checking, washing, ordering) or mental acts (such as counting, praying,
repeating words silently) that the person feels driven to perform in response to an obsession or
according to rigid rules
• These behaviours or mental acts are aimed at preventing or reducing distress or preventing some
dreaded event or situation BUT are not realistically connected to the obsessions they are meant to
neutralize
What can I do if it is OCD?
If you are concerned your student has OCD, you should send the student to the school guidance or health
professional who can then refer the student to the professional best suited to provide treatment and you can
continue to provide support to the student as part of their “circle of care”. Usually young people will be treated
with cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) and an Selective Serotonin Reputake Inhibitor (SSRI) medication. It
is important to know if any academic modifications need to be made to enhance learning opportunities for
young people with OCD, so including the teacher in treatment planning and treatment monitoring is usually
necessary.
Questions to ask:
Are you having thoughts that are coming into your mind that you do not want to be there? Do those thoughts
cause you to feel uncomfortable or anxious or upset? Do you think that those thoughts are true? How are you
trying to deal with or stop the thoughts from coming? What do the thoughts stop you from doing that you would
otherwise be doing? Please describe the things that you are doing that are causing distress to you or other
people. Can you tell me why you are doing those things? What do you think will happen if you do not do those
things? What do those things that you are doing stop you from doing that you would otherwise be doing?
Treatment for OCD requires applications of both medications and an evidence-based psychotherapy such as
CBT.
Things to look for:
There are two main things to watch out for. The first is the possibility that the symptoms could be part of a
psychosis. Therefore it is very important to rule out a psychosis disorder. The second thing to watch for is
the effect OCD has on the young person’s classmates. Sometimes students with severe OCD will try to
involve their classmates (or their teachers) in their compulsions. If this happens then it can cause
significant problems at school. Educating yourself about OCD and the importance of not participating in
the OCD ritual is important.
33
--- PAGE 35 ---
What is Post Traumatic Stress Disorder?
Post Traumatic Stress disorder (PTSD) develops after a significant trauma occurs that was either experienced
or witnessed by the young person. It involves the development of psychological reactions related to the
experience such as recurrent, intrusive and distressing recollections of the event. These may be in the form of
nightmares, flashbacks and/or hallucinations. Recent widening of diagnostic criteria have included repeated or
extreme indirect exposure in the performance of professional duties. This is not the same as watching tragic
events on the television.
It is essential not to confuse normal negative emotions with PTSD. Feeling upset about a stressful event is not
PTSD. Feeling upset when remembering a stressful time or event is not PTSD. The word trauma and the
phrase “traumatic experience” should be reserved for severe, substantive and significant (often life-threatening)
events. They should not be used to describe stress-provoking and difficult, unusual or common challenges of
life.
Who is at risk for developing PTSD?
Not all people who have experienced a traumatic event will develop PTSD. Most will not. Risk factors include
personal or family history of Depression, severity and persistence of the trauma.
What does PTSD look like?
The symptoms of PTSD develop around 6-8 weeks following the traumatic event and are organized into
different categories:
• Intrusion Symptoms – recurrent, intrusive, distressing recollections or memories of the event
in the form of memories, dreams, or flashbacks in which the individual perceives themself to be
re-living the event as though it was actually happening again in the present.
• Avoidance Symptoms – avoidance of things – people, places, topics of conversation,
food, drink, weather conditions, clothing, activities, situations, thoughts, feelings – that are associated
with or are reminders of the traumatic event. In addition the person may experience a general sadness,
numbing of emotions, a loss of interest in previously enjoyed activities, detachment from family and
friends, and a sense of hopelessness about the future.
• Hyper Arousal Symptoms – sleep problems (difficulties falling asleep or staying asleep), irritability,
aggression, angry outbursts, hypervigilance, self-destructive behaviour, exaggerated startle response,
and difficulty concentrating.
• Negative Moral Symptoms – Unable to recall key aspects, persistent and disturbed negative feelings,
self-blaming, guilt, shame, detachment.
1. The person has been exposed to a traumatic event in which both of the following were present:
• The person felt their life was in danger or witnessed someone else’s life put in danger
34
--- PAGE 36 ---
• The person experienced extreme fear, helplessness or horror
2. The traumatic event is re-experienced, including one or more of:
• Recurrent intrusive memories, dreams or nightmares reliving the event which causes
psychological distress.
3. Avoidance of things associated with the event including 3 or more of:
• Avoiding thoughts, feelings or conversations, avoiding activities, places or people, inability to
recall aspect of the trauma, decreased interest or participation in activities, feeling detached or
estranged from others, restricted range of affect, sense of foreshortened future.
4. Persistent symptoms of increased arousal including 2 or more of:
• Difficulty falling or staying asleep, irritability, difficulty concentrating, hypervigilance, exaggerated
startle responseshort time accompanied by a lack of control over the eating during the episode)
and by frequent and
5. Duration of symptoms greater than 1 month:
• Severity of symptoms causes marked distress and impairment in daily functioning.
How does PTSD differ from Acute Stress Disorder or normal grieving?
It is normal to remember traumatic events and to feel distress or discomfort when doing so. This is not PTSD.
PTSD must be distinguished from normal responses (such as grief, acute stress response, etc.) to such
situations and from Acute Stress Disorder (ASD). ASD has similar symptoms to PTSD but ends or is
diminished greatly sometimes without formal treatment within about four weeks of the traumatic event.
Psychotherapies or SSRI medication may be used to treat ASD. Duration and severity of PTSD symptoms may
vary over time with recovery occurring within half a year (or less) in about half of cases.
What can I do if it is PTSD?
The first thing is to identify the young person with PTSD and help them find a knowledgeable helper who can
provide education to them about what the problem is and how it can be treated. The role of the school is not to
treat but to suggest treatment. It is important not to confuse PTSD with normal responses to traumatic events
(often called an acute stress response) or with ASD. Do not create pathology where it does not exist! For
people with PTSD, supportive counselling using cognitive therapy methods may be of help. If the disorder is
causing significant distress and impairment, referral to a specialist health care provider is indicated, as
medication or specific types of psychotherapeutic treatments may be needed.
What questions can I ask?
Are you bothered by memories or thoughts of a very upsetting event that has happened to you? What kinds of
things are you experiencing? How is the affecting your life?
Things to look for:
Some people who are exposed to significantly traumatic events may have exacerbations of pre-existing
mental disorders such as Depression or Psychosis. Identification and proper effective interventions for
these people in the post traumatic situation is important. Substance abuse, especially involving alcohol is
common in people who have PTSD. Therefore it is important to screen for this problem in people with
PTSD and to treat appropriately.
Treatment for PTSD usually requires both an evidence-based psychotherapy plus medication.
35
--- PAGE 37 ---
Mental Disorder of Physical: Eating Disorders
What is an Eating Disorder?
There are two main types of eating disorders: Anorexia Nervosa (AN) and Bulimia Nervosa (BN). While there
may be some overlapping symptoms between the two, they are likely to have different causes and the
treatments for them differ.
Who is at risk for developing an eating disorder?
Eating disorders usually begin in adolescence and may continue into adulthood. Girls are much more
commonly affected than boys, but anyone may develop on Eating Disorder.
What does Anorexia Nervosa look like?
Anorexia Nervosa is characterized by excessive preoccupation with body weight control, a disturbed body
image, an intense fear of gaining weight and a refusal to maintain a minimally normal weight. Post-pubertal
girls also experience a loss of menstrual periods. There are two subtypes of AN – a restricting subtype (in
which the young person does not regularly binge or abuse laxative or engage in self-induce vomiting) and a
binge-eating/purging subtype (in which the young person regularly binges and abuses laxatives or self-induces
vomiting).
What does Bulimia Nervosa look like?
Bulimia Nervosa is characterized by regular and recurrent binge-eating (large amounts of food over a short
time accompanied by a lack of control over the eating during the episode) and by frequent inappropriate
behaviours designed to prevent weight gain (including but not limited to: self-induced vomiting, use of
laxatives, enemas, and/or excessive exercise).
How do you differentiate an eating disorder from normal teenage eating?
Eating patterns in young people can be very erratic. Food fads are common as are periods of dieting and food
restriction (often in response to concerns about weight). Adolescence is also a period in which some young
people experiment with food types and eating patterns that may differ substantially from those common to their
families or communities. These are not eating disorders.
What are the criteria for the diagnosis of AN?
1) Refusal to maintain body weight at or above a minimally normal weight for age and height resulting in a
body weight less than 85% of that expected.
2) Intense fear of gaining weight or becoming fat while underweight.
3) Substantial disturbances in body image (considers self to be fat even though is underweight) or denial
of seriousness of current low body weight.
4) Loss of menstrual periods in post-pubertal girls.
36
--- PAGE 38 ---
What can I do if it is AN?
Young people with AN do not complain about having AN and most deny that they have a problem with being
underweight. Usually a friend, teacher or family member will notice the severe weight loss. An educator who is
concerned that a student may have AN should gently and supportively discuss the issue with the young person
and if after that discussion it seems as if there is a possibility of AN, the young person should be referred to the
appropriate support person or health provider in the school for further assessment and intervention.
Suggestions that the young person eat more or negative comments on the youth’s weight are
counterproductive.
Treatments for AN are based on maintenance of a maintained body weight and psychological interventions.
Medications are not affective in AN. Treatment for AN usually requires a sub-specialty mental health eating
disorders service.
Things to look for:
Some people with AN may go on to develop Depression or severe medical problems. Some young people
may begin to avoid class or other school activities. Frequently, young people with AN will avoid eating at
times all other young people are eating (such as lunch time in the school cafeteria).
What are the criteria for the diagnosis of BN?
1) Recurrent episodes of binge-eating where both of the following are present: a) eating large amounts
of food in a short period of time; b) feeling that eating is out of control.
2) Recurrent inappropriate behaviours in order to control weight (such as: self-induced vomiting; misuse
of laxative, diuretics, enemas or other medications, fasting or excessive exercise.)
3) The above must occur an average at least twice a week for a period of 3 months.
4) Self perspective is overly influenced by body shape and weight.
5) The above does not occur exclusively during BN.
There are two subtypes of BN – the purging type (characterized by self-induced vomiting, or misuse of laxative,
diuretics, enemas, etc.); the non-purging type (no use of the above).
What can I do if it is BN?
Young people with BN do not complain about having BN and most deny that they have a problem with eating.
BN is often hidden. Classroom discussions about BN and other eating problems should be undertaken with
the sensitivity that there may be a young person with unknown or unrecognized BN in the group.
Treatment for BN includes both psychological therapies and medications.
Questions to ask:
How do you feel about yourself? Has anyone asked you if you were having problems with your eating? Do
you sometimes feel that your eating may be out of control?
37
--- PAGE 39 ---
Mental Disorders of Behaviour: ADHD, Substance Related Disorders, Conduct
Disorder
Substance Use Disorder
There is a spectrum of harm that can develop from using various substances. Along this spectrum of harm is
abuse and dependence.
Substance Related Disorders
Substance use and substance misuse occur commonly in young people and are not the same as Substance
Use Disorders or Substance Induced Disorders. However, the onset of the latter most commonly occurs during
the teen years. Currently, alcohol and tobacco are the most commonly used substances with marijuana ranking
a more distant third on the list. Clinical interventions to help young people who are misusing substances are
often provided based on the realization that some types of substance misuse may raise the probability of
substance related harm, even if the young person does not go on to develop a Substance Use Disorder.
Indeed, most people who misuse substances in their youth do not go on to develop a Substance Use Disorder.
To this end, the CRAFFT (as described below) youth substance assessment measure can be used to identify
those young people for whom a clinical intervention may be indicated before they go on to develop a
Substance Use Disorder. Young people who have engaged in one or more items on the CRAFFT screening
tool could be considered as candidates for early intervention.
Substance Use Disorders (SUDs) are characterized by excessive and continued use of substances in spite of
numerous negative consequences (physical, social, academic/vocational, interpersonal and legal). People with
SUDs crave the substance and exhibit persistent drug seeking behaviours which can include various anti-
social components, such as theft. Young people who meet diagnostic criteria for a SUD require intensive
treatment that may include short-term residential care. Treatment relapse is common.
Adolescent Alcohol & Substance Use Screen (CRAFFT):
C Have you ever ridden in a CAR driven by someone (including yourself) who was “high” or had been
using alcohol or drugs?
R Do you ever use alcohol or drugs to RELAX, feel better about yourself, or fit in?
A Do you ever use alcohol/drugs while you are ALONE?
F Do you ever FORGET things you did while using alcohol or drugs?
F Do your family or FRIENDS ever tell you that you should cut down on your drinking or drug use?
T Have you gotten into TROUBLE while you were using alcohol or drugs?
38
--- PAGE 40 ---
Substance Induced Disorder describes the impact of a substance on a person at a particular point in time. For
example, this includes: intoxication or withdrawal.
Substance Induced Disorder (SID) can occur without the presence of Substance Use Disorder. For example, a
young person can be intoxicated from excessive use of alcohol and behave inappropriately or dangerously
(driving a car) or be admitted for emergency medical care due to an inability to function or as a result of a
neurological event (such as a seizure). During this time, the person would be considered to exhibit a
Substance Induced Disorder. Many young people, especially if they are involved in binge drinking of alcohol,
can meet diagnostic criteria for SID if excessive amounts of alcohol are ingested over a short period of time.
This would be called Alcohol Induced Disorder.
Some SIDs can, in the short term, be difficult to distinguish from certain types of mental disorders, such as
psychosis or mood disorders. This is because the substance can elicit delusions and hallucinations or severe
Depressions or extreme excitement and agitation. In such cases, admission to hospital is often indicated - both
to treat the SID and also to differentiate symptoms related to an SID from those of a psychosis or mood
disorder.
With Substance Use Disorder, the person demonstrates a longstanding pattern of negative behaviours as
described above related to the persistent seeking out of and use of a particular substance. For example, a
person with Alcohol Use Disorder could be intoxicated for hours in a day, may steal to obtain funds to purchase
alcohol, may neglect their personal hygiene when drinking, may run afoul of the law or act inappropriately at
school, etc. This pattern of behaviour would occur frequently over time and would be associated with significant
functional impairment (for example: failing at school; legal charges, traffic accidents while drinking, etc.).
Individuals with SUDs may frequently also demonstrate SID at numerous points over time, while many people
who demonstrate SID at infrequent time points may not meet diagnostic criteria for SUD.
There are many types of SUDs. An SUD can occur with substances that are legal (for example: tobacco or
alcohol) or illegal. These include but are not limited to: Alcohol Use Disorder, Cannabis Use Disorder, Opioids
Use Disorder, etc. Not infrequently, the type of SUD can change over time or a person can meet criteria for
more than one SUD concurrently.
Treatments are a combination of psychological and social (often peer-supported) interventions. Sometimes
medications are used depending on the substance and the situation.
What is Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder?
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by a persistent
pattern of hyperactivity, impulsivity and substantial difficulties with sustained attention that is outside the
population norm and is associated with substantial functional impairments at school, home and with peers.
This disorder begins early in life and continues into adolescence and for some people, into adulthood.
Who is at risk for ADHD?
ADHD has a genetic component and is more common in boys. Girls who have ADHD often do not have similar
problems with hyperactivity although they have problems with sustaining attention and impulsivity. Young
people who have learning disabilities and youth with Tourette’s Syndrome have higher rates of ADHD. Young
people with Conduct Disorder may have ADHD which has not been recognized or treated and which may
contribute to their social and legal difficulties. About 30% of youth with ADHD have a learning disability.
39
--- PAGE 41 ---
What does ADHD look like?
Not all students who demonstrate challenges with sustained attention have ADHD. Problems with sustaining
attention may result in substantial difficulties in on-task behaviours. Young people with ADHD frequently make
multiple careless errors, do not complete their academic or home-based tasks and may start but not complete
numerous activities. They are easily distracted by stimuli in their environment (such as noise) and often will
begin to avoid tasks that require significant attention (such as homework). Young people with ADHD will often
rush into things such as games or other activities without taking the time to learn the rules or determine what
they should do.
Hyperactivity is often manifested by difficulties staying still in one place – such as sitting at a desk or in a
group. Younger children may run around the room (or climb on furniture, etc.) instead of focusing on group
activities. Most young people with ADHD have trouble sitting still and are very active – often they will fidget, talk
excessively, make noises during quiet activity and generally seem ‘wound up’ or ‘driven’.
Impulsivity is often shown as impatience or low frustration tolerance. Young people with ADHD will often
interrupt others, fail to listen to instructions, rush into novel situations without thinking about the consequences,
etc. This type of behaviour may lead to accidents. Many youth with ADHD also do not seem to be able to learn
quickly from negative experiences – it is as if the impulsivity overrides learning about dangers. These
difficulties can be less pronounced in activities that require a great deal of physical participation and are
constantly engaging. Sometimes young people with ADHD seem less distracted when they are playing games
that they like – especially games that do not require sustained attention (such as video games). Symptoms are
more likely to be noticed when the young person is in a group setting in which sustained and quiet attention is
needed or when they are working in an environment in which there are many distractions.
What are the criteria for diagnosis of ADHD?
There must be a number of symptoms from each of the following categories: inattention, hyperactivity,
impulsivity, plus a duration of at least six months to a degree that the person demonstrates maladaptive
behaviours and trouble functioning that is inconsistent with their level of development. These must be
significantly greater than other students of similar age.
Inattention (at least six of the following):
1) Failure to give close attention or many careless errors in work requiring sustained attention (such as
school work)
2) Difficulty sustaining attention in tasks or play
3) Does not seem to listen when spoken to directly
4) Does not follow through on instructions
5) Has difficulty organizing tasks and activities
6) Avoids tasks that require sustained attention (such as homework)
7) Loses things needed for tasks and activities
8) Easily distracted by the environment
9) Forgetful in daily activities
40
--- PAGE 42 ---
Hyperactivity
1) Blurts out comments or answers to questions before they should
2) Has difficulty waiting their turn
3) Often interrupts or intrudes on others
4) Often “acts” without thinking
5) Fidgets or squirms while seated
6) Leaves seat in classroom when they are supposed to be seated
7) Runs about or climbs excessively when not appropriate
8) Has difficulty in solitary play or quiet activities
9) Is usually on the go, as if motor driven
10) Often talks excessively
11) Impulsivity
What can I do if it is ADHD?
ADHD can be treated with a combination of medications and other assistance – such as social skills training
and cognitive behavioural therapy. The most effective treatment for symptoms is medication. Because learning
difficulties are common, young people with ADHD should undergo educational testing to determine if a learning
disability is present. Sometimes youth with ADHD will benefit from modifications to their learning environments
such as having quieter places in which to work or having homework done in small amounts over longer periods
of time.
Some young people with ADHD will develop conduct disturbances or substance misuse. Many will become
demoralized because of constant reminders from teachers, parents and others about their ‘bad behaviour’.
Remember that these young people are not bad - they simply have difficulties with sustained attention. Try not
to decrease their self-esteem by focusing only on what they have difficulty doing - focus on their strengths as
well.
Questions to ask?
Are you having difficulties focusing on your schoolwork? Is it hard for you to finish your work if there are noises
or distractions? Do your parents or teachers seem to be nagging you all the time to do your work and sit still?
What is Conduct Disorder?
Severe, persistent and challenging behaviours that threaten the safety, security or physical integrity of others
are the phenomena that comprise Conduct Disorder (CD). Youth with CD act with aggression and even
violence towards others, either in response to a challenge or without provocation. They threaten (verbally and
physically) and intimidate others and can cause physical harm to others, including assault with a weapon. They
commonly engage in property damage or theft and frequently violate norms of social behaviour such as
running away from home, lying, school truancy and bullying of others occurs. Young people with CD have
higher rates of substance misuse, difficulties with the law (for example: arrests and convictions), traffic
accidents, school non-completion and poorer economic/vocational outcomes. They may be involved in various
illegal activities including crimes against people and property. A sub-group of those with CD may later in life
meet diagnostic criteria for Anti-Social Personality Disorder and rates of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
and Substance Use Disorder are higher in youth with CD.
41
--- PAGE 43 ---
Behaviours Related to Mental Disorders: Suicide and Self-Harm
What is suicide?
Suicide is the act of ending one’s life. Suicide is the outcome of a behaviour, is not a mental disorder. But one
of the most important causes of suicide is mental illness – most often Depression, Bipolar Disorder (Manic
Depression), Schizophrenia, and Substance Use Disorder.
Suicide is found in every culture and is the result of complex social, cultural, religious and socio-economic
factors in addition to mental disorders. The reasons for suicide may vary from region to region. Because of this,
it is important to know what the most common reasons for suicide are in the region in which you are working.
This may be difficult to determine accurately because of the “taboos” and stigma around suicide.
The preferred methods of completing suicide may vary from location to location – ranging from firearms to
fertilizer poisoning to self-burning to overdosing on pills. Therefore, it is also important to know the most
common methods of suicide in the region in which you are working. For more information, check out this link:
http://teenmentalhealth.org/learn/suicide/.
How are suicide and self-harm different?
Self-harm is a behavior initiated for many different reasons. These include but are not limited to: onset of a
mental illness, experience of overwhelming stress (such as ongoing sexual abuse), pressure to be part of a
subculture, different problem-solving skills. Teachers should not try to “understand” or “control” youth who
self-harm. Referral to a specialized mental health provider is needed.
Self-harm behaviours are not attempts to die. Suicide attempts are distinguished from self-harm behaviours by
a person’s wish to die.
Suicidal behaviour has three components: ideation, intent, and plans.
1. Suicidal ideation includes ideas about death or dying, wishing that they were dead, or ideas about
committing suicide. These ideas are not persistent for some youth but for some they can become so.
These ideas can be fairly common in people with mental disorders or in people who are in difficult life
circumstances. Most people with suicidal ideation do not go on to attempt suicide but the suicidal
ideation is a risk factor for suicide.
2. The second component is suicidal intent. With suicidal intent, the idea of suicide is better formed and
more consistently held than in suicidal ideation. A person with suicidal intent may think about suicide
most of the time, imagining what life would be like for friends and family without them, etc.
3. The third component is the suicide plan. This is a clear plan of how the act of suicide will occur. Vague
plans (such as “someday I will jump off a bridge”) are considered as part of intent. In a suicide plan the
means of suicide will be identified and obtained (such a gun, poison, etc.) and the place and time will
be chosen. The presence of a suicide plan constitutes a psychiatric emergency.
42
--- PAGE 44 ---
of suicide ideation or have intents may benefit from supportive or cognitive based counselling. The presence of
a suicide plan should lead to placement of the person in a situation in which they can be safe and secure. That
situation should be therapeutic and not punitive, and should be accompanied by supportive and cognitive
counselling. Any mental disorder should be treated. If a suicide has happened, the family or loved ones may
benefit from non-judgmental supportive bereavement counselling.
Educators may be faced with situations in which they encounter students self-harming. Do not panic. Calmly
bring the student to the most appropriate “in school” support. When discussing self-harm, it is useful to explain
the behaviour as an attempt to solve a problem and to note that better solutions exist. Encourage the student
to work towards using those. Do not get involved in discussions about self-harm.
Do not keep suicide concerns or self-harm behaviours confidential.
If a teacher is faced with a student who is talking about or writing about suicide then it is important to include
the most appropriate student services provider to assess the situation.
Supportively accompany them to the most responsible student health provider in the school so that an
assessment of risk can be conducted. Generally it is better to err on the side of caution and take the young
person to a location in which they can be safe. Schools should have policies about how to deal with a suicidal
youth – know your school’s policy. If there is no policy, bring this issue to the attention of the principal.
If a young person dies by suicide, there can be negative repercussions amongst peers, classmates and
teachers. It is important not to force students or others into reliving or analyzing the event. Traditional Critical
Incident Stress Debriefing interventions have not been shown to be helpful and may even cause harm.
Bringing grief counsellors into a school is not usually helpful. A supportive space for those students who wish to
use it should be provided after school hours and a teacher or guidance counsellor known to the students
should ideally be available for those who wish to talk. Each community will have its own traditions for dealing
with this kind of event and it is not necessary to create highly effective responses to a suicide in the school
setting. Self-harm can become a preferred (but unhelpful) approach to problem-solving. Certain mental
illnesses (such as Bipolar Disorder) may lead to self-harm because of unstable mood. Sometimes self-harm
behaviours can become part of a group identity. Contagion effects can occur in both self-harm and suicide
attempts.
What are risk factors for suicide?
The following are the most common (and strongest) risk factors for suicide in young people. Remember that a
risk factor does not mean something that causes an event to happen. Rather, it is something that increases the
probability of an event.
• Depression or other mental disorder
• Previous suicide attempt
• Family history of suicide
• Excessive alcohol or drug use
Suicide risk is higher in people with mental disorders, in particular those with: Depression, Bipolar Disorder
(Manic Depression), Schizophrenia, and Substance Use Disorder. If a young person talks to you about suicide,
take them seriously and take them to the person in the school best able to help. Do not keep suicide or self-
harm confidential. It is not helpful to engage in persistent public discourse about suicide or self-harm. Youth
43
--- PAGE 45 ---
What can I do if it is Suicide?
The first thing is to identify the presence of suicide ideation, intent and plans. Young people who have thoughts
approach a trusted adult for assistance. Youth who self-harm can be counseled to seek alternative and better
methods to solve problems.
Questions to ask?
It seems as if things have been difficult for you - can you share how you are feeling? When you are feeling this
way, do you think you would be better off dead or that life is not worth living? Have you been thinking about
taking your own life?
The focus of suicide education is to frame the presence of suicidal thoughts
as a signal to seek help from a trusted adult.
Treatments for suicide risk are based on rapid access to effective ongoing care for a mental disorder. For
self-harm, evidence-based psychotherapies are used.
Confidentiality
When speaking to students, ensure that they understand what will and will not remain confidential. Know your
professional expectations and the legal parameters in your jurisdiction as well as the policies of your school.
Harm to self or others cannot be held in confidence. Remember that any electronic interaction (such as email,
texting, etc.) that you have with a student cannot be assumed to be or remain confidential. When speaking with
parents, remember that the student may expect confidentiality from parents, parents from student and even
parents from each other. Providing information on confidentiality to students and parents (for example, on the
school website) is useful. Always document your interaction with a student in which a mental health concern
has been raised.
What to do?
If you are concerned about a student, involve your school’s student services provider (counsellor, social
worker, psychologist, etc.) as soon as possible. Discuss the situation and come up with a mutually acceptable
plan. Remember that what you are addressing is not your sole responsibility. A teacher is not a diagnostician,
is not a counsellor and is not the student’s friend. Be careful not to get caught in the problem-solving (teacher
becomes responsible for solving the student’s problem) or understanding (teacher’s role is to understand the
student) traps. Provide clear messages about drug use, self-harm and dangerous behaviour. Provide a
confidential ear with clear limits to confidentiality.
Teachers should be part of the circle of care that surrounds a student in need. This requires input from
teachers and the sharing of necessary information. If your school does not have a process for enlisting
44
--- PAGE 46 ---
appropriate teacher participation in a circle of care, raise this issue with your administration.
For more information on mental health and mental disorders, as well as access to useful (and free) classroom
and teacher-friendly resources, visit www.teenmentalhealth.org.
45
--- PAGE 47 ---
Student Evaluation
Student Evaluation
A suggested student evaluation consisting of 28 knowledge questions and 8 attitude questions is available
online at: http://teenmentalhealth.org/curriculum/prepost-student-evaluations/.
It is also avaliable over the next few pages in the Guide.
How to Use the Evaluation:
Teachers may wish to use this evaluation before and after teaching the Guide. Teachers who wish to develop
their own evaluation methods may do that instead.
Over the next four pages you’ll find the Student Survey for your use.
The correct answers to the Student Survey questions can be found immediately after the Student Survey.
Ideally each student should be given the survey just prior to being taught the modules and the survey should
be repeated immediately after the last module. Comparing each students’ post-to their pre-scans will give you
a good idea of how their knowledge has improved or how much their attitudes have changed as a result of their
exposure to the materials.
46
--- PAGE 48 ---
Student Evaluation
STUDENT SURVEY (2017 version) Date:_____________
The MENTAL HEALTH & HIGH SCHOOL CURRICULUM GUIDE
Name: _________________________________________________________________
For each of the following statements select True, False, or Do Not Know by marking an X in the
appropriate box.
Question True False Do Not
Know
1. Mental health and mental illness both involve the brain and how x
it functions.
2. People who have mental illness can at the same time have x
mental health.
3. The brain can affect the way the body functions but the body x
can not affect the way the brain functions.
4. The frontal lobes of a young person’s brain continue to grow and x
develop until about the age of 25 years.
5. Three of the functions of the brain include thinking, signaling and x
behavior.
6. Most everyday stress is toxic and should be avoided x
7. The only stigma in our society is about mental health. x
8. An example of a mental health problem is feeling stressed about x
writing an exam.
9. The symptoms of mental illness are thought to be caused by x
disturbances in the usual functioning of the brain.
10. People who have a mental illness are frequently violent. x
11. Most people who have a mental illness get well and stay well x
with treatment.
12. People who have schizophrenia often get a split personality. x
13. Vitamins and meditation are effective treatments for most x
mental illnesses.
14. Depression and Bipolar Disorder are two examples of the type x
47
of mental illnesses called Mood Disorders.
15. An Anxiety Disorder happens when a person’s brain detects the x
presence of danger – such as a dog attacking.
16. Panic Disorder commonly begins in adolescence. x
17. Most people who are feeling stressed out or unhappy have a x
mental disorder such as Anxiety or Depression
18. Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder has three components x
including attention problems, hyperactivity and impulsivity.
--- PAGE 49 ---
STUDENT SURVEY (2017 version) Date:_____________
The MENTAL HEALTH & HIGH SCHOOL CURRICULUM GUIDE
Name: _________________________________________________________________
For each of the following statements select True, False, or Do Not Know by marking an X in the
appropriate box.
Question True False Do Not
Know
1. Mental health and mental illness both involve the brain and how x
it functions.
2. People who have mental illness can at the same time have x
mental health.
3. The brain can affect the way the body functions but the body x
can not affect the way the brain functions.
4. The frontal lobes of a young person’s brain continue to grow and x
develop until about the age of 25 years.
5. Three of the functions of the brain include thinking, signaling and x
behavior.
6. Most everyday stress is toxic and should be avoided x
7. The only stigma in our society is about mental health. x
8. An example of a mental health problem is feeling stressed about x
writing an exam.
9. The symptoms of mental illness are thought to be caused by x
Sditstuurbadncees in nthe tus uaEl funvctioaningl ouf thae brtaiin.o n
10. People who have a mental illness are frequently violent. x
11. Most people who have a mental illness get well and stay well x
with treatment.
12. People who have schizophrenia often get a split personality. x
13. Vitamins and meditation are effective treatments for most x
mental illnesses.
14. Depression and Bipolar Disorder are two examples of the type x
of mental illnesses called Mood Disorders.
15. An Anxiety Disorder happens when a person’s brain detects the x
presence of danger – such as a dog attacking.
16. Panic Disorder commonly begins in adolescence. x
17. Most people who are feeling stressed out or unhappy have a x
mental disorder such as Anxiety or Depression
18. Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder has three components x
including attention problems, hyperactivity and impulsivity.
19. Suicide in young people is mostly related to bullying and has x
little to do with mental illness.
20. Self-harming behaviors may sometimes accidently lead to x
death.
21. Treatment of mental disorders has three purposes including, x
relieving symptoms, restoring functioning, and promoting recovery.
22. People with Social Anxiety Disorder experience irrational and x
excessive fear that they will act in a way that will be humiliating or
embarrassing.
23. Anorexia Nervosa is an eating disorder that can lead to death x
24. One important job of the brain is to help the person adapt to x
their environment.
25. Mental disorders usually begin because of the stresses of x
everyday life.
26. Depression is usually caused by an event such as breaking up x
with a person you are dating, having a fight with your best friend or
not getting enough likes on a very important social media post you
made.
27. Daily exercise, healthy nutrition and spending time interacting x
with friends are all important components of mental health AND
potentially helpful self-care for people who have a mental disorder
28. Medicines should never be used to treat a mental disorder. x
29 . People who have a mental disorder will not be able to be x
successful in their chosen field of work (such as: being a politician;
being an astronaut; being an author or composer). FALSE
30. Mental distress is a signal that treatment from a psychologist or x
counselor is needed.
48
--- PAGE 50 ---
Teacher Handout
Classroom Exercise for the Beginning of Each Module
Purpose
To teach students two useful stress reduction techniques that they can apply in their everyday lives.
Method
Beginning with Module One, when you are introducing the mental health literacy teaching from the Guide that
you will be doing over the next week or so, tell the students that each time that they will be engaging with the
mental health literacy materials you will begin the class by leading them through a three to five minute exercise
that will help them get their brains and bodies ready to take on the challenges of life, and will help them do that
more successfully. The two exercises are outlined below.
Exercise One
The first is Deep Breathing also called Box Breathing. If you have internet access you can link to this website
(https://gearpatrol.com/2017/02/02/box-breathing-navy-seals/) and use the animation it contains. You may
want to point out that this is a technique used by elite athletes and elite combat troupes to help them perform
their best.
Otherwise you can draw this diagram on the board and take the students through the exercise.
Have the students conduct four or five full cycles of the breathing techniques under your example.
Box Breathing
One useful technique to learn to help with dealing with stress is Box Breathing. It takes about 15 minutes to learn and once mastered can be
applied unobtrusively and quietly – ideal for a classroom situation. This technique is described below. Just before beginning the How Do You
Cope exercise is a good time to teach the students Box Breathing.
Box Breathing can help your heart rate return to normal, which helps you to relax. Here’s how you do it: If possible, sit and close your eyes. If not,
just focus on your breathing.
Step 1: Inhale your breath (preferably through your nose) for 4 seconds.
Step 2: Hold your breath for 4 seconds. You’re not trying to deprive yourself of air; you’re just giving the air a few seconds to fill your lungs.
Step 3: Exhale slowly through your mouth for 4 seconds.
Step 4: Pause for 4 seconds (without speaking) before breathing again.
Repeat this process as many times as you can. Even 30 seconds of deep breathing will help you feel more relaxed and in control.
Exercise Two
The second one uses both muscle relaxation and the technique is known as centering. We call it the Focus on
Your Hands.
Have the students make a tight fist with both hands. Tell them to block out paying attention to anything else
(including their own thoughts) and attend completely to the sensations that they feel in both fists. Then have
them slowly open their fists focusing on how their muscle tension gradually relaxes. When the fist is fully
opened have them do two cycles of box breathing while they feel the relaxation in their hands.
Ask your students to practice using these techniques at home for 5 minutes every day. Also ask them to start
using these techniques when they are facing a challenge that they need to overcome (such as writing a test,
giving a classroom presentation, getting ready for an important meeting or event, etc.). The task here is to
become good at these techniques by the time the class reaches Module 6.
49