
--- PAGE 3 ---
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Table of Contents
Acknowledgments .............................................................................................................iii
Developing Physical Literacy ...............................................................................................v
Teacher Notes ...................................................................................................................vii
Introduction ........................................................................................................................1
Broad Areas of Learning ......................................................................................................2
Aim and Goals of K-6 Physical Education ...........................................................................3
An Effective Physical Education Program ............................................................................5
Counteracting Myths ..........................................................................................................5
Constructing Understanding through Inquiry .....................................................................7
Meeting the Needs of All Students ....................................................................................10
Planning ............................................................................................................................11
Achieving Grade Specifi c Curricular Outcomes .................................................................29
Assessment and Evaluation of Student Learning ................................................................33
Considerations for Program Delivery ................................................................................49
The Connection and Distinction between Dance in Physical Education
and Dance in Arts Education ............................................................................................52
Kindergarten Physical Education Outcomes and Indicators ..............................................53
Grade 1 Physical Education Outcomes and Indicators ......................................................58
Grade 2 Physical Education Outcomes and Indicators ......................................................69
Grade 3 Physical Education Outcomes and Indicators ......................................................80
Grade 4 Physical Education Outcomes and Indicators ......................................................92
Grade 5 Physical Education Outcomes and Indicators ....................................................104
Grade 6 Physical Education Outcomes and Indicators ....................................................113
Appendix.........................................................................................................................127
Glossary ..........................................................................................................................149
References .......................................................................................................................151
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6 i
--- PAGE 4 ---
ii PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6
--- PAGE 5 ---
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Acknowledgments
The Department of Education and Early Childhood Development of Prince Edward Island gratefully
acknowledges the contributions of the elementary physical education curriculum committee and the
pilot teachers to the development of this curriculum guide. Current and past members of the committee
include the following:
Chris Meuse - West Royalty Elementary School
Dave Matthews - Gulf Shore Consolidated School
Kim McNeill - Elm Street Elementary School
Cheryl Tanton - Somerset Elementary School
Jacki Ross - Westwood Primary School
John Morrison - Department of Health and Wellness
Lori MacPherson - Department of Education and Early Childhood Development
Jacquie Lidstone - PEI Home and School Representative
Pilot Teachers
Chris Meuse - West Royalty Elementary School
Dave Matthews - Gulf Shore Consolidated School
Kim McNeill - Elm Street Elementary School
Cheryl Tanton - Somerset Elementary School
Jacki Ross - Westwood Primary School
Robyn MacDonald - Vernon River Consolidated School
The Department of Education and Early Childhood Development is also grateful to the province
of Saskatchewan for granting permission to reproduce/adapt materials from the Saskatchewan
Physical Education K-6 curriculum documents to assist us in the development of this guide.
Saskatchewan Education. (2010) Kindergarten to Grade 6 physical education. Saskatchewan Ministry
of Education: Curriculum and E-Learning, Humanities Unit).
This curriculum guide is intended to provide teachers with an overview of the outcomes framework
for K-6 physical education and to assist teachers in designing learning experiences and assessment
tasks.
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6 iii
--- PAGE 6 ---
iv PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6
--- PAGE 7 ---
Developing Physical Literacy
Physical literacy can be described as the ability and motivation to capitalize on
our movement potential to make a significant contribution to our quality of life.
As humans, we all exhibit this potential; however, its specific expression will
be particular to the culture in which we live and the movement capacities with
which we are endowed.
An individual who is physically literate:
• moves with poise, economy, and confidence in a wide variety of
physically challenging situations.
• is perceptive in ‘reading’ all aspects of the physical environment,
anticipating movement needs or possibilities and responding appropriately
to these, with intelligence and imagination.
• has a well-established sense of self as embodied in the world. This,
together with an articulate interaction with the environment, engenders
positive self esteem and self confidence.
• develops fluency in self-expression through non-verbal communication
and perceptive and empathetic interaction with others.
• can identify and articulate the essential qualities that influence the
effectiveness of own movement performance, and has an understanding of
the principles of embodied health, with respect to basic aspects such as
exercise, sleep, and nutrition.
(Whitehead, 2006)
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6 v
--- PAGE 8 ---
vi PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6
--- PAGE 9 ---
Teacher Notes:
Percentage of time for elementary physical education curriculum grades K-6: 5% (15 minutes/day, 75
minutes/week, 90 minutes/6-day cycle, or 46.25 hours/year)
Authorized Resources for 2011 Grades K-6 Elementary Physical Education Curriculum:
Fundamental Movement Skills Series - (5 titles)
Fundamental Movement Skills: Active Start and Fundamentals Handbook
Fundamental Movement Skills II: Learning to Train Stage
Fundamental Movement Skills IA: For Children with Physical Disabilities
Fundamental Movement Skills: Active Start and Fundamental Stages - For Children with
Developmental and/or Behavioural Disabilities
Fundamental Movement Skills: Beyond the Fundamentals - A Games Approach
Kidnastics
More Fun and Games
No Standing around in My Gym
Teaching Sport Concepts and Skills - 2nd ed.
Orienteering, Level One Basic Skills Series
Teaching Personal and Social Responsibility through Physical Activity - 3rd ed.
Prince Edward Island Physical Education Curriculum Guide, Grades K-6
The following titles were purchased by the Department of Education and Early Childhood
Development over the past few years and distributed to all elementary schools. These were one time
only purchases.
Canadian Active Living Fitness Circuit Charts
101 Games to Play in a New Way
Energize: LD-ENG
Intramural Recreation
Playground Leadership
Convenorology: So You Want to Be a Convenor
Intramuralology: A Quick Reference Guide for Intramural Programs
Fun First
Physical Education For Elementary School Children
Ready-to-Use P.E. Activities for Grades K-2, 3-4, and 5-6
A copy of the Prince Edward Island Physical Education Safety Guidelines document should be available
in the gymnasium area. The intent of these guidelines is to focus the teacher’s attention on safe
instructional practices for all physical activity in order to minimize the inherent element of risk. The
guidelines are mandatory.
Cross-curricular links have been made throughout this document. These links are all based on the
curriculum that existed in subject areas when this document was being developed.
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6 vii
--- PAGE 10 ---
viii PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6
--- PAGE 11 ---
Introduction
Physical education is a required area of study in Prince Edward Island’s core
curriculum. The provincial requirement for Grades K-6 Physical Education is
a minimum of 75 minutes of instruction per week or 90 minutes per 6-day
cycle for the entire school year in order to provide opportunities for students
to develop positive attitudes toward active living, and gain self-confi dence as
skilful movers, and to promote personal, social, cultural, and environmental
Research fi ndings... support the
growth and appreciation. Quality physical education, as part of the entire
inclusion of Physical Education in
learning experience concerned with educating the whole person, will support
the overall educational experiences
students in developing a solid foundation for a balanced life.
of children and illustrate the value
of Physical Education in the holistic
This curriculum provides the intended learning outcomes that Grades K-6
development of students.
students are expected to achieve in physical education by the end of each
(Hickson & Fisburne, n.d., p. 6) year. Indicators are included to provide the breadth and depth of learning
required by the outcomes.
The physical education curriculum provides
(cid:129) the critical characteristics and philosophical foundations of effective
physical education programs;
(cid:129) the learning outcomes for Grades K-6 Physical Education that are based
on research;
Students who are physically
(cid:129) indicators related to the outcomes (i.e., evidence of student
educated are:
understanding) to enable teachers to assess the degree to which students
• Able to make connections have achieved each outcome;
between all aspects of human
(cid:129) sample assessment rubrics and evaluation guide for physical education;
nature (physical, emotional,
mental, and spiritual) (cid:129) ideas for connecting physical education with other subject areas.
• Working towards balance,
harmony, and inter- This curriculum also provides an introduction to pedagogical understandings
connectedness on their journey necessary for the effective teaching of physical education.
• Persevering, setting goals,
learning patience, enjoying the
benefi ts of a physically active
lifestyle that leads to a state of
wholeness and wellness and
sharing this knowledge with
others.
(Kalyn, 2006, p. 195)
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6 1
--- PAGE 12 ---
Broad Areas of Lifelong Learners
Learning Students who are engaged in constructing and applying physical
education knowledge naturally build the ability to continue learning in
this area of study. Throughout their study of physical education, students
will develop a holistic balance in the attitudes, understandings, skills,
tactics, and strategies necessary to learn in various movement activity
settings. Students will develop skills in transferring this learning to a
variety of contexts which will support them as lifelong learners.
Sense of Self, Community, and Place
In physical education students will experience multiple opportunities
to grow in all aspects of their lives, while learning to share these
understandings as they support others in achieving a balanced self. In
striving for this balance, students will be better able to contribute to the
development of healthy individuals, families, and communities.
Engaged Citizens
In physical education students will experience opportunities to initiate,
plan for, and lead positive change that will enhance the personal well-
being of self and others. Students will refl ect on the various infl uences
that affect decisions and engage in opportunities to contribute to social,
cultural, and environmental activities that will benefi t all citizens.
Developing Social Responsibility
People demonstrate social responsibility when they positively contribute
to their physical, social, and cultural environments. This requires the
ability to participate with others in accomplishing common goals.
This competency is achieved through using moral reasoning processes,
engaging in communitarian thinking and dialogue, and taking social
action. In physical education, students will develop personal skills to
support socially responsible behaviour that is considerate of others and
respectful of individual differences.
2 PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6
--- PAGE 13 ---
Aim and Goals The aim of the physical education curriculum is to provide opportunities for
students to develop knowledge, skills, and positive attitudes toward active
of K–6 Physical
living. The curriculum will support students in acquiring the understandings
Education and skills to engage in movement activity and to develop a solid foundation
for a balanced lifestyle.
The K-6 goals are broad statements identifying what students are expected
to know and be able to do upon completion of study in a particular area of
study. The goals of physical education are interdependent and are of equal
importance. The three goals for students from kindergarten to grade 6 are
By teaching students the concepts the following:
of how much, how often, and
(cid:129) Active Living – enjoying and engaging in healthy levels of participation
how long to engage in physical
in movement activities to support lifelong active living in the context of
activity, physical educators can
self, family, and community
promote self-responsibility and
independent, lifelong activity (cid:129) Skilful Movement – enhancing quality of movement by understanding,
patterns.... age-appropriate developing, and transferring movement concepts, skills, tactics, and
activities must be used to teach strategies to a wide variety of movement activities
(health-related) fi tness concepts
(cid:129) Relationships – balancing self through safe and respectful personal,
from grade to grade.
social, cultural, and environmental interactions in a wide variety of
(Gilbert, 2004, pp. 25-26) movement activities.
Active Living Goal
Active living is a concept that goes beyond the physiological aspects of
participation in movement activity to encompass the mental, emotional,
spiritual, and social dimensions that make up the entire physical experience.
Active living is about individual well-being. How we experience well-being
is uniquely personal; it varies over time and among individuals. Active living
is also social and it goes beyond a traditional focus on individual lifestyle
choices and emphasizes the physical and social environments that facilitate
or hinder people’s ability and motivation to be active. These environments
are shaped by and with families, in the communities where people live,
learn, work, and play. Active living comes to life in community settings of all
kinds.
The active living goal emphasizes the need for children to participate in
“authentic” learning experiences that are enjoyable and that lead students
to deeper understandings about physical fi tness. Children benefi t from
play, and purposeful play will support students in being active for life. To
support personal well-being, opportunities for students to enhance each
of the components of health-related fi tness are interwoven throughout the
program. A well-balanced physical education program goes a long way
towards ensuring that the active living goal is achieved by all students.
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6 3
--- PAGE 14 ---
Skilful Movement Goal
The opportunity to move is important, but learning the hows and whys
Children who possess inadequate of movement is more important if children are to gain the confi dence
motor skills are often relegated and ability to participate in a variety of movement activities. This
to a life of exclusion from the skilful movement goal addresses all aspects of effective motor learning
organized and free play experiences with students gaining a deeper understanding of the transferability of
of their peers, and subsequently, movement skills from one movement activity to another. Rather than
to a lifetime of inactivity because learning the skills of a particular game or sport, students learn the
of their frustrations in early foundations of movement. They will understand how to move their
movement behaviour. bodies effi ciently and effectively and learn a variety of skills within the
context of types of games.
(Seefeldt, Haubenstricker, &
Reuschlen [1979] in Graham, Students will be more willing to engage in movement activities if they
Holt/ Hale, & Parker, 2007, p. 28) know how to move skilfully, and understand the concepts, tactics, and
strategies that support skilful and enjoyable participation. Through
involvement in authentic learning experiences, students deepen
their understanding of how to move and will transfer these skills to
meaningful contexts in future years. A life of active living is more likely
to be a reality if students are confi dent in their ability to move, and if
they have an understanding of and the ability to apply the whats, whys,
and hows of skilful movement.
Relationships Goal
“Relationships” is a multi-faceted word in the context of the
The focus on holistic education is relationships goal for physical education. On a personal level, students
on relationship – the relationship will develop a deeper understanding that will enhance their physical,
between linear thinking and emotional, mental, and spiritual selves through and within movement
intuition, the relationship between experiences. Students will also engage in a variety of experiences to
mind and body, the relationship support growth as social beings, whether it be co-operatively creating
between the various domains and performing movements, making decisions collectively about tactics
of knowledge, the relationship to use in games, or leading others in movement activities. In turn, as
between the individual and the students develop their social skills, students will strengthen who they are
community, and the relationship as individuals.
between self and self. In a holistic
curriculum the student examines The relationships goal also promotes the translation of cultural awareness
these relationships so that he into action. Authentic multicultural curricula in physical education
or she gains both relationship honour and help to preserve the cultural traditions of the many groups
awareness and the skills necessary that are part of our society. This includes the games, dances, languages,
to transform the relationship where celebrations, and other forms of physical culture.
necessary.
When students become aware of cultural groups, values, and practices,
(Smith, 2001, p. 83)
and the problems faced by minority cultures, students are better able to
engage in multiple, diverse relationships.
4 PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6
--- PAGE 15 ---
Through experiences in physical education, students interact both with and
within their environment. Practising and internalizing the behaviours that
show a respect for both the natural and the constructed environment have a
signifi cant impact on lifelong practices. This focus within the relationships
goal includes everything from proper use of equipment in the gymnasium to
making enhancements to the natural environment.
An Effective
There are six characteristics emphasized in this curriculum that are
components of an effective physical education program. Student learning is
Physical
supported by a program that
Education
(cid:129) focusses on achieving physical literacy;
Program (cid:129) provides meaningful contexts, key ideas, and questions for elementary
level students to explore;
(cid:129) teaches students how to use critical, creative, and powerful learning
strategies;
(cid:129) meets the needs of all students;
(cid:129) is planned purposefully and based on the curriculum;
(cid:129) is defi ned by the grade specifi c outcomes.
Counteracting The vision of physical education and the physically literate individual
presented in this curriculum counteracts a number of common myths.
Myths
Myth: Physical education is not an integral part of a student’s learning
experience. It is an extra.
Fact: Physical education is a required area of study in Prince Edward
Island. It is interconnected with all other subject areas in the pursuit of
educating the whole person. It involves students directly in thinking,
creating meaning, and learning how to learn.
Myth: Committing time to physical education programs may be
detrimental to student achievement in other subject areas. It is important
to focus on the “academic” subjects because those are the ones that will
determine a student’s success in life.
Fact: Participation in physical education can improve students’ success
in all areas of study. “Adding to the growing body of research extolling
the cognitive benefi ts of physical exercise, a recent study concludes
that mental focus and concentration levels in young children improve
signifi cantly after engaging in structured physical (movement) activities”
(Caterino & Polak [1999], in Blaydes, n.d., p.2).
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6 5
--- PAGE 16 ---
Myth: As long as the children are active, having fun, and behaving, they
are engaged in a quality physical education program.
Fact: Active play and enjoyment are important aspects of a quality
physical education program but are not the fi nal indicators of a benefi cial
program that will support children in being physically literate. Teachers
need to plan purposeful learning experiences for students around the
whats, hows, and whys of being active, moving skilfully, and securing
strong relationships. Students who develop deeper understandings in
these areas will be more willing and able to engage in active living for life.
Teachers need to teach for understanding and skill through enjoyable
Our physical movements can
participation in movement activity.
directly infl uence our ability to
learn, think, and remember.
Myth: The main purpose of physical education is to help students achieve
It has been shown that certain
excellence in games and sports.
physical activities that have a
strong mental component, such
Fact: Physical education is a multifaceted process that teaches a wide
as soccer or tennis, enhance
range of concepts, tactics, strategies, skills, and deeper understandings
social, behavioral, and academic
with the aim of the students becoming physically educated and physically
abilities. Evidence is mounting
fi t, able to enjoy a variety of movement activities, able to interact
that each person’s capacity to
positively in a variety of situations, and committed to lifelong well-being.
master new and remember old
It is a continuing process of articulated, sequential development of skills,
information is improved by
talents, attitudes, and behaviours.
biological changes in the brain
brought on by physical activity.
Myth: Physical education only addresses the physical components of the
Our physical movements call upon
individual.
some of the same neurons used
for reading, writing, and math.
Fact: Although physicality is the primary focus within physical education
Physically active people report
classes, it cannot stand alone. As holistic beings, we must recognize the
an increase in academic abilities,
spiritual, mental, and emotional aspects of human nature as well. These
memory, retrieval, and cognitive
dimensions of our being must all work together as we strive for balance,
abilities.
harmony, and wellness.
What makes us move is also what
Myth: Physical education focusses on the more athletically gifted.
makes us think. Certain kinds
of exercise can produce chemical
Fact: All students have the potential to become physically literate, and
alterations that give us stronger,
an effective physical education program will benefi t all young people
healthier, and happier brains. A
regardless of their interests, skills, or abilities.
better brain is better equipped to
think, remember, and learn.
Myth: Physical education should be similar to training – highly “skill and
(Ratey, 2001, p. 178)
drill” oriented. It should be mainly a mechanical process, with drill and
practice instructional methods being the most effective.
Fact: In physical education, emphasis must be placed on a broad
spectrum of learning and personal development. Learning involves
thinking and feeling, being active, processing information, thinking
critically, and making decisions, not just using skills. Teachers need to
provide students with a diversity of learning experiences that provide
students with multiple ways of showing what they know.
6 PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6
--- PAGE 17 ---
Myth: Students should carry out a variety of physical fi tness activities but
do not need to understand why they are doing so.
Fact: Learning cognitively is as important to physical education as
learning specifi c movement skills. Students need to know why they
A Quality Physical Education
are learning what they learn in physical education, and how they
program includes:
are benefi ting personally. Then they will be more likely to accept
• Well planned lessons responsibility for their own learning and commit to active living to enjoy
incorporating a wide range of the benefi ts of physical education over the long term.
activities.
• A high level of participation by all Myth: Physical education programs that provide students with a diversity
students in each class. of movement experiences may be detrimental to doing one’s best in a
• An emphasis on fun, enjoyment, particular activity. It is important to focus on a specifi c activity (or sport)
success, fair play, self-fulfi llment, in order to do really well.
and personal health.
• Appropriate activities for the age Fact: A well-planned, comprehensive physical education program helps
and stage of each student. children and youth develop all their abilities and talents rather than
• Activities which enhance focussing exclusively on a narrow range. Because children and youth
cardiovascular systems, muscular change and grow over time, they should become well-rounded. They
strength, endurance, and should become profi cient in and appreciate a wide variety of movement
fl exibility. activities, and then choose wisely. As the educator, you may need to
• Creative and safe use of facilities go outside of your comfort zone to provide for students activities you
and equipment. may not feel comfortable teaching. This may require collaboration with
(Canadian Association of Health, colleagues, community members, and provincial organizations to ensure
Physical Education, Recreation, that activities are properly introduced.
and Dance, 2006)
(Adapted by permission from the Physical Education Frame work 1994,
California Department of Education, CDE Press, 1430 N Street, Suite
3207, Sacramento, CA 95814.)
Constructing Inquiry learning provides students with opportunities to build knowledge,
abilities, and inquiring habits of mind that lead to deeper understanding of
Understanding
their world and the human experience. The inquiry process focusses on the
through Inquiry development of compelling questions, formulated by teachers and students,
to motivate and guide inquiries into topics, problems, and issues related to
curriculum content and outcomes.
Inquiry is more than a simple instructional strategy. It is a philosophical
approach to teaching and learning, grounded in constructivist research and
methods, which engages students in investigations that lead to disciplinary
and transdisciplinary understanding.
Inquiry builds on children’s inherent sense of curiosity and wonder, drawing
on their diverse backgrounds, interests, and experiences. The process
provides opportunities for students to become active participants in a
collaborative search for meaning and understanding.
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6 7
--- PAGE 18 ---
Students who are engaged in inquiry
(cid:129) construct knowledge and deep understanding rather than passively
receiving information;
Inquiry is a philosophical stance (cid:129) are directly involved and engaged in the discovery of new knowledge;
rather than a set of strategies,
(cid:129) encounter alternative perspectives and differing ideas that transform
activities, or a particular teaching
prior knowledge and experience into deep understandings;
method. As such, inquiry promotes
intentional and thoughtful (cid:129) transfer new knowledge and skills to new circumstances;
learning for teachers and children.
(cid:129) take ownership and responsibility for their ongoing learning and mastery
(Mills & Donnelly, 2001, p. xviii) of curriculum content and skills.
Inquiry learning is not a step-by-step process, but rather a cyclical process,
with various phases of the process being revisited and rethought as a result of
students’ discoveries, insights, and co-construction of new knowledge. The
following graphic represents various phases of this cyclical inquiry process.
8 PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6
--- PAGE 19 ---
Inquiry prompts and motivates students to investigate topics within
Effective Questions for
meaningful contexts. The inquiry process is not linear or lock-step, but
Understanding
is fl exible and recursive. Experienced inquirers will move back and forth
• cause genuine and relevant among various phases as new questions arise and as students become more
inquiry into the important ideas comfortable with the process.
and core content.
Well-formulated inquiry questions are broad in scope and rich in
• provide for thoughtful, lively
possibilities. Such questions encourage students to explore, observe, gather
discussion, sustained inquiry,
information, plan, analyse, interpret, synthesize, problem solve, take
and new understanding as
risks, create, conclude, document, refl ect on learning, and formulate new
well as more questions.
questions for further inquiry.
• require students to consider
alternatives, weigh evidence,
(Adapted from Kuhlthau & Todd, 2008, p.1)
support their ideas, and justify
their answers.
Creating Questions for Inquiry in Physical
• stimulate vital, ongoing
rethinking of key ideas, Education
assumptions, and prior lessons.
• spark meaningful connections Teachers and students can begin their inquiry at one or more curriculum
with prior learning and personal entry points; however, the process may evolve into transdisciplinary
experiences. integrated learning opportunities, as refl ective of the holistic nature of our
• naturally recur, creating lives and interdependent global environment.
opportunities for transfer to other
situations and subjects. It is essential to develop questions that are evoked by student interests and
have potential for rich and deep learning. Compelling questions are used
(Wiggins & McTighe, 2005, p.110) to initiate and guide the inquiry and give students direction for developing
deep understandings about a topic or issue under study.
The process of constructing compelling questions can help students to grasp
the important disciplinary or transdisciplinary ideas that are situated at the
core of a particular curricular focus or context. These broad questions will
lead to more specifi c questions that can provide a framework, purpose, and
direction for the learning activities in a lesson, or series of lessons, and help
students connect what they are learning to their experiences and life beyond
school.
In physical education, effective questions are the key to fostering students’
critical thinking and problem solving. Questions such as “How should we
respond when we are playing and someone else is cheating?” and “What
are some activities we can participate in that will help to make our heart
stronger?” are examples of questions that will lead to deeper understanding.
Questioning should also be used to encourage students to refl ect on how
their actions and behaviours affect and are affected by others. Questions
could be “Whose job is it to make sure we are physically active every day?”
and “Is there ever a time when we are playing that we do not need to co-
operate?” Examples of questions to support students’ deeper understanding
appear throughout the indicators related to different outcomes. Effective
questioning is essential for student learning and these questions should be
an integral part of teacher planning.
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6 9
--- PAGE 20 ---
Learning through Critical, Creative, and
Powerful Strategies
Critical and creative thinking are central components of learning. Within
physical education, one focus should be on “refl ective thinking that is
used to make reasonable and defensible decisions about movement tasks
or challenges” (McBride, 1992, p.115). More importantly, students need
to experience opportunities to use critical and creative thinking within
movement performance to understand more deeply the hows and whys of
movement. Teachers should plan for authentic learning experiences that will
support students in exploring, questioning, refl ecting, and making decisions
to develop deeper understanding that will lead to the transfer of learning to
new situations. Students need opportunities to think critically and creatively,
thus setting a foundation for future learning.
Meeting the An inclusive physical education environment is one which provides the
opportunity for students of all abilities and interests to participate in physical
Needs of All
education with their peers. Inclusive physical education recognizes the
Students inherent value and strengths of each student, the need for independence
and self-determination, and the right to choice. Inclusive physical education
provides all students, including students with disabilities, the opportunity
to take full advantage of opportunities to enhance personal fi tness, acquire
motor skills, increase knowledge and understanding of movement, and
strengthen their psychosocial well-being. Teachers can provide all students
with the knowledge, understandings, and skills they need to live an active life
appropriate to their abilities and interests (Rizzo, Davis, & Toussaint, 1994).
All students can learn about the talents, challenges, and abilities of all
classmates. Students learn to appreciate that individual differences exist
between people, and they learn that participating in an activity in a different
way does not lessen its value. Inclusion recognizes the inherent value, dignity,
and worth of each student, and reduces perceived differences among students.
The process of identifying each student’s needs and accommodating them in
a dignifi ed and effective manner is the key to ensuring full and meaningful
participation in physical education.
All students can benefi t from adaptations to the learning environment and/
or learning experience. They will all benefi t when teachers use a variety of
instructional strategies. Almost all students can achieve curriculum outcomes
in authentic ways when basic adaptations are made.
Teachers will need to make individualized adaptations or modifi cations to
meet the needs of some students as these students work towards achieving the
grade specifi c outcomes. Physical education teachers can seek support from
the school services team and outside agencies to gain ideas on how best to
work with students who have specifi c individual needs.
10 PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6
--- PAGE 21 ---
A few students will not be able to achieve all of the grade specifi c physical
education outcomes. These students will need an Individualized Educational
Plan (IEP) that includes physical education outcomes. Physical education
teachers can work with the school student services team and outside agencies
to plan physical education learning experiences that meet the needs of these
students.
When teachers are initially given the challenge and opportunity of planning
physical education for a student with a disability, feelings of uncertainty are
to be expected. This may be due to a lack of information and experience that
will change as teachers become more familiar with each student’s strengths,
interests, and abilities.
The process of developing an inclusive program will involve the following
steps:
(cid:129) obtaining information about the disability
(cid:129) identifying support
Because of the importance students (cid:129) determining safety concerns
place on feeling confi dent in their (cid:129) assessing present skill level
abilities, Physical Education (cid:129) contributing to the Individual Educational Plan
teachers should work diligently to (cid:129) setting realistic expectations
create opportunities for all of their (cid:129) selecting activities
students to experience success. (cid:129) determining program modifi cations
(cid:129) implementing and evaluating.
(Humbert, 2005, p. 12)
(All schools have Moving To Inclusion binders and Fundamental
Movement Skills 1A: For Children with Physical Disabilities. You can
also contact the Active Living Alliance for Canadians with a Disability
(ALACD) at 1-800-771-0663 or www.ala.ca.)
Planning Teachers can create authentic learning opportunities for their students
through purposeful planning. The curriculum outcomes are the starting
point for all planning.
Year Planning
The sample year plan provided is based on the following assumptions and
recommendations:
(cid:129) Instructional physical education is scheduled for 75 minutes a
week or 90 minutes per 6-day cycle, or 46.25 hours/year.
(cid:129) Physical education classes are scheduled for at least 30 minutes
every second day throughout the school year.
(cid:129) All outcomes will be addressed initially by the teacher with the
teacher planning to set the context for learning so as to engage the
students in the learning process. To support students in achieving
the outcomes, teachers will also need to plan extending and applying/
challenging learning experiences.
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6 11
--- PAGE 22 ---
(cid:129) Initiation of student learning is teacher-led and is an introduction
to the new learnings related to knowledge, understandings, skills,
and attitudes.
(cid:129) Extension of student learning is teacher-led and builds on
previously introduced learnings to support students in growth
towards achieving the outcomes.
(cid:129) Application/challenge of student learning is teacher-facilitated
with the teacher guiding students through learning experiences
that challenge them to apply the knowledge, understandings,
skills, and attitudes they have gained through previous learning
opportunities.
(cid:129) All outcomes are interconnected and interdependent. Any
combination of outcomes can be the focus for a time frame of
instruction. Teachers should look for the connections when
planning and make the connections when teaching. This will
support students in developing the deeper understandings
towards achieving the K-6 goals for physical education by the end
of Grade 6.
(cid:129) Teachers begin by mapping out a year plan for the scaffolding
of learning. The teachers fi rst consider a progression for student
learning that will support the students in achieving each
outcome by the end of the year. Teachers then plan for making
connections between the outcomes. This will help the teachers
identify how and when to initiate and extend learnings, as well
as when to challenge students to apply their learnings to ensure
that students achieve the outcomes by the end of the year.
Suggested Yearly Minimum Time Commitment to
Outcomes
The tables on the following pages provide a recommended amount of time to
commit to each outcome. Even though the time is not equal for all outcomes,
each outcome is important and teachers should plan to initiate and extend
learnings for all outcomes.
Based on the recommended percentage of time for elementary physical
education in Prince Edward Island, students will receive at least 46.25 hours
per school year of physical education instruction. Of course, the percentage
of time may vary from school to school with 46.25 hours being the minimum
instructional time. The suggested yearly minimum time commitment on the
following pages suggest 50 hours of instruction time per year. Ten hours of
the 50 hours is fl exible time. Flexible time refers to the instructional choices
made by teachers based on needs and interests of students, as well as the
community context.
12 PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6
--- PAGE 23 ---
Kindergarten
Suggested Minimum Time Commitment to Outcomes
Suggested Hours of Focus
Extending
Initiating Total Hours
Applying/
Challenging
Outcome K.1
4 2 6
Fitness
Outcome K.2
4 2 6
Locomotor Skills
Outcome K.3
4 2 6
Non-locomotor Skills
Outcome K.4
4 2 6
Manipulative Skills
Outcome K.5
4 2 6
Movement Variables
Outcome K.6
4 2 6
Rhythmical Movement
Outcome K.7
2 2 4
Relationships
Subtotal 26 14 40
Flexible Attention 10
(Teacher decisions based on needs and interests of students, as well as the community context)
Total Hours 50
Note: Number of hours is approximate
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6 13
--- PAGE 24 ---
Grade 1
Suggested Minimum Time Commitment to Outcomes
Suggested Hours of Focus
Extending
Initiating Total Hours
Applying/
Challenging
Outcome 1.1
4 2 6
Health-Related Fitness
Outcome 1.2
2 1 3
Active Living
Outcome 1.3
3 2 5
Locomotor Skills
Outcome 1.4
3 1 4
Non-locomotor Skills
Outcome 1.5
2 1 3
Manipulative Skills
Outcome 1.6
3 1 4
Movement Variables
Outcome 1.7
2 1 3
Rhythmical Movement
Outcome 1.8
4 2 6
Play Strategies and Skills
Outcome 1.9
2 1 3
Safety and Co-operation
Outcome 1.10
2 1 3
Relationships
Subtotal 27 13 40
Flexible Attention
(Teacher decisions based on needs and interests of students, as well as the community context) 10
Total Hours 50
Note: Number of hours is approximate
14 PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6
--- PAGE 25 ---
Grade 2
Suggested Minimum Time Commitment to Outcomes
Suggested Hours of Focus
Extending
Initiating Total Hours
Applying/
Challenging
Outcome 2.1
4 2 6
Health-Related Fitness
Outcome 2.2
2 1 3
Active Living
Outcome 2.3
3 2 5
Locomotor Skills
Outcome 2.4
2 1 3
Non-locomotor Skills
Outcome 2.5
3 2 5
Manipulative Skills
Outcome 2.6
2 1 3
Movement Variables
Outcome 2.7
2 1 3
Rhythmical Movement
Outcome 2.8
4 2 6
Strategies and Skills
Outcome 2.9
2 1 3
Safe Behaviours
Outcome 2.10
2 1 3
Relationships
Subtotal 26 14 40
Flexible Attention
(Teacher decisions based on needs and interests of students, as well as the community context) 10
Total Hours 50
Note: Number of hours is approximate
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6 15
--- PAGE 26 ---
Grade 3
Suggested Minimum Time Commitment to Outcomes
Suggested Hours of Focus
Extending
Initiating Total Hours
Applying/
Challenging
Outcome 3.1
4 2 6
Health-Related Fitness
Outcome 3.2
3 1 3
Active Living
Outcome 3.3
3 1 4
Locomotor Skills
Outcome 3.4
2 1 3
Non-locomotor Skills
Outcome 3.5
4 2 6
Manipulative Skills
Outcome 3.6
3 2 6
Movement Variables
Outcome 3.7
3 1 4
Strategies and Skills
Outcome 3.8
2 1 3
Positive Interactions
Outcome 3.9
1 1 2
Safety
Outcome 3.10
2 1 3
Relationships
Subtotal 27 13 40
Flexible Attention
(Teacher decisions based on needs and interests of students, as well as the community context) 10
Total Hours 50
Note: Number of hours is approximate
16 PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6
--- PAGE 27 ---
Grade 4
Suggested Minimum Time Commitment to Outcomes
Suggested Hours of Focus
Extending
Initiating Total Hours
Applying/
Challenging
Outcome 4.1
5 2 7
Health-Related Fitness
Outcome 4.2
1 1 2
Body Systems
Outcome 4.3
4 1 5
Complex Locomotor Skills
Outcome 4.4
1 1 2
Locomotor Skills
Outcome 4.5
2 2 4
Complex Non-locomotor Skills
Outcome 4.6
2 2 4
Manipulative Skills
Outcome 4.7
1 2 3
Complex Manipulative Movement
Outcome 4.8
1 2 3
Movement Refi nement
Outcome 4.9
2 1 3
Skilful Play
Outcome 4.10
2 1 3
Tactics, Strategies, and Rules
Outcome 4.11
1 1 2
Safety and First Aid
Outcome 4.12
1 1 2
Relationships
Outcome 4.13
1 1 2
Culture and History
Subtotal 24 18 42
Flexible Attention
(Teacher decisions based on needs and interests of students, as well as the community context) 8
Total Hours 50
Note: Number of hours is approximate
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6 17
--- PAGE 28 ---
Grade 5
Suggested Minimum Time Commitment to Outcomes
Suggested Hours of Focus
Extending
Initiating Total Hours
Applying/
Challenging
Outcome 5.1
3 2 5
Health-Related Fitness
Outcome 5.2
1 2 3
Muscular Fitness
Outcome 5.3
3 2 5
Complex Skills
Outcome 5.4
1 3 4
Manipulative Skills
Outcome 5.5
3 3 6
Complex Manipulative Skills
Outcome 5.6
2 3 5
Performance Refi nement
Outcome 5.7
3 3 6
Skilful Play
Outcome 5.8
1 1 2
Rules
Outcome 5.9
1 1 2
Safety and First Aid
Outcome 5.10
1 1 2
Social Skills
Outcome 5.11
1 1 2
Culture and History
Subtotal 20 22 42
Flexible Attention
(Teacher decisions based on needs and interests of students, as well as the community context) 8
Total Hours 50
Note: Number of hours is approximate
18 PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6
--- PAGE 29 ---
Grade 6
Suggested Minimum Time Commitment to Outcomes
Suggested Hours of Focus
Extending
Initiating Total Hours
Applying/
Challenging
Outcome 6.1
3 2 5
Cardiovascular Fitness
Outcome 6.2
1 1 2
Body Composition
Outcome 6.3
3 1 4
Muscle Fitness
Outcome 6.4
1 1 2
Skill-Related Fitness
Outcome 6.5
2 2 4
Complex Skills
Outcome 6.6
1 1 2
Manipulative Skills
Outcome 6.7
1 1 2
Biomechanics
Outcome 6.8
1 1 2
Movement Concepts
Outcome 6.9
3 3 6
Decision Making
Outcome 6.10
3 3 6
Alternate Environment and Body Management
Outcome 6.11
1 1 2
Volunteerism and Leadership
Outcome 6.12
1 1 2
Infl uences
Outcome 6.13
1 2 3
Safety and Rules
Outcome 6.14
1 1 2
Relationship Skills
Outcome 6.15
1 1 2
History and Culture
Subtotal 25 23 46
Flexible Attention
4
(Teacher decisions based on needs and interests of students, as well as the community context)
50
Total Hours
Note: Number of hours is approximate
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6 19
--- PAGE 30 ---
Outcome Emphasis
Initiate Teachers are initiating student learning through teacher-led learning experiences.
This often involves new learning for students.
Extend Teachers are extending student learning by building on previously initiated and
connected learnings.
Outcome Emphasis Teachers are facilitating student learning by guiding students through learning
experiences that challenge them to apply the knowledge, understandings, skills, and
attitudes they have gained through previous initiated and extended learning.
Lesson Planning
The prerequisite of a meaningful learning experience is a well-planned
lesson. All lesson planning should begin with an analysis of the outcomes
to determine what it is students should know, understand, and be able to
do. The indicators related to each outcome guide the plan for learning in
each lesson and demonstrate the types of knowledge required (i.e., factual,
conceptual, procedural, metacognitive, or a combination) to achieve each
outcome. The teacher should also consider the types of evidence that would
demonstrate that students have achieved the outcome and think about
how they will assess student progression towards achieving the indicated
outcomes. Once the outcomes, indicators, and assessment decisions have
been made, teachers could choose to use an “opening for learning - body of
learning - closure for learning” format for the actual lesson. Teachers may
also want to identify equipment, materials, and space needed, as well as
organizational, safety, and management considerations to maximize learning
opportunities. This three-part format is described below. Although described
separately, the sections are interconnected.
Opening For Learning
(cid:129) Should begin with a variety of warm-up activities and/or exercises,
both teacher-selected and student-determined, which focus on the
indicators associated with one or a few different outcomes
(cid:129) Should set the stage for the fl ow of the lesson and be based on a
connected whole-part-whole approach as opposed to teaching from
the parts (e.g., skills) to the whole (e.g., game play) or teaching
disconnected pieces.
Body of Learning
(cid:129) Should fl ow naturally from the learning experiences that were the
focus of the warm-up.
(cid:129) Should engage students in outcome-driven learning opportunities
that support the students in achieving the outcomes and refl ect the
representative list of indicators.
(cid:129) Should be designed to keep active learning time to a maximum.
(cid:129) Should identify method to distribute equipment effi ciently (at
least one object for every two students).
(cid:129) Should incorporate opportunities for students to be involved in
initiating the design of the learning experiences. (This will see the
students as seekers of meaning with the teacher as their guide.)
20 PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6
--- PAGE 31 ---
Closure for Learning
(cid:129) Should provide a chance for discussion and/or additional refl ection,
thus encouraging the students to make meaning of the learning
experience. In this way, students can further develop deeper
understandings and teachers can gain insight as to the success of
the lesson and possible direction for subsequent lessons.
Since outcomes are interconnected and interdependent, any combination of
the outcomes can be the focus for a lesson. These connections should also
be made when the teacher is planning a lesson. This will support students
in developing deeper understanding of the separate outcomes and, more
important, deeper understandings of the connected learnings associated with
being physically literate. (A sample lesson plan template and some sample
leasson plans are included following this section.)
During the lesson all students should be expected to perform to the best of
their ability. Adjustments may need to be made, however, to accommodate
individual abilities and to support all students in experiencing success. When
working with individual students, the teacher should personalize instruction
and give feedback equally to both genders, to students with various skill
levels, and to students with additional needs in ways that support personal
growth towards achieving the learning outcomes. The teacher involves all
students in developing deeper understandings such as those identifi ed in the
indicators, and provides meaningful feedback, both positive and corrective,
that advances learning.
Teachers can plan for learning to continue beyond the actual scheduled
physical education class. This will provide opportunities for students to
develop independent learning skills and to take responsibility for learning.
Families can be partners in supporting their children as they engage in active
living and become skilful movers.
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6 21
--- PAGE 32 ---
Sample Lesson Plan Template
Lesson Plan Template
Date:
Outcome Focus: The teacher identifi es the interrelated/interconnected outcomes that are the starting point for the lesson
plan and analyses these outcomes to determine the types of knowledge required (i.e., factual, conceptual, procedural, meta-
cognitive, or a combination).
Learning Focus: This is where the specifi c indicators for the lesson are identifi ed.
Assessment and Evaluation: The teacher determines the types of evidence that would demonstrate that students have
achieved the outcomes and plans strategies and processes to incorporate throughout the lesson that will support the teacher
in determining whether each student knows and can complete part of the process towards achieving the outcomes.
Organization and Management Considerations: Planning related to organization of students, use of space, safety consider-
ations, equipment requirements, rules, routines, and other factors can be completed here.
Opening for Learning
The teacher establishes the lesson focus, setting the stage for the fl ow of the lesson. The opening is clearly connected to the
focus of the lesson and the the developmental and closure parts of the lesson. It is the initial “whole” in the recommended
whole-to-part-to whole approach for the fl ow of the entire lesson.
Indicators: The teacher Learning Experience: The teacher can describe exactly what the students will be doing and
identifi es the specifi c indi- what the teacher will be doing to open the lesson. This introductory movement activity
cator(s) that will guide the should serve as a lead-in activity for the lesson. The indicators associated with the outcome
learning. for the lesson will provide ideas for the opening.
The teacher will want to plan for adaptations and extensions in this section.
Development of Learning
This is the instructional portion of the lesson and should include a variety of experiences that will support students in
achieving the outcomes and refl ect the representative list of indicators. The learning opportunities planned for this section
should transition from the lesson opening experience and students should be aware of what they will be learning during the
lesson.
Indicators: The teacher Learning Experience: The teacher develops the learning sequence. It could include
identifi es the specifi c indi- demonstrations, teacher-led practice of tasks (e.g., hop forward fi ve times) and challenges
cator(s) that will guide the (see how high in the air you can hop), learning stations, and co-operative activities and
learning. play. As much as possible, this plan should be built with the inquiry process as the founda-
tion for learning and with student exploration being encouraged. Throughout this learning
experience, the teacher should also include plans for questioning for deeper understanding
(e.g., “What do you feel happening to your heart?” “Is this a good thing to have happened
when you are exercising?”).
Closure for Learning
This is a plan to review the key points of the lesson as stated in the lesson focus and emphasized throughout the lesson. It
may be in the form of quesitons allowing students to provide insights regarding the extent to which the lesson outcomes
have been attained. It could include additional assessment and evaluation strategies.
Refl ection: Following the lesson, the teacher could use this section to write a few notes that will assist in making decisions
regarding future lessons. The main focus of this section should be self-questioning related to how well the students achieved
the intended learnings for the lesson. The key quesiton in this post-lesson thinking time should be:
“If students do not know or cannot do the learning focus of this lesson, what will I do?”
This section will serve as the pre-thinking stage for a subsequent lesson.
22 PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6
--- PAGE 33 ---
Sample Lesson Plan
Sample Lesson Plan - Grade 1
Date:
Outcome Focus: Health-Related Fitness (1.1)
Locomotor Skills (1.3)
Play Strategies and Skills (1.8)
Learning Focus (Indicators):
(cid:129) Sustain participation in moderate to vigorous locomotor activities (e.g., walking, snowshoeing, running, dancing,
hiking, swimming, parachute play) and lead-up games (e.g., tag games, follow-the-leader) that increase heart rate and
respiration rate, towards fi ve consecutive minutes on a consistent basis. (1.1)
(cid:129) Identify changes in the body that are natural and safe reactions to participating in moderate to vigorous movement
activities (e.g., heart beats faster, body is sweating, breathing is faster, skin gets red, body feels warm/hot). (1.1)
(cid:129) Explore and demonstrate a variety of ways to travel through space (e.g., imitate motorized and non-motorized
vehicles, imitate animals, imitate athletes) without contacting others. (1.3)
(cid:129) Walk, forward and backward, and run, forward, through general space trying to not make contact with others and
stop on signal without falling down. (1.3)
(cid:129) Demonstrate a willingness to try to apply discussed strategies for playing a variety of games (e.g., take turns being the
leader in follow-the-leader). (1.8)
(cid:129) Assume responsibility for various roles (e.g., leader, follower, “it,” “not it”, while participating in low-organizational
games and activities .(1.8)
Assessment and Evaluation: Check for understanding by questioning throughout the lesson. Begin tomorrow’s lesson with
an opening that will extend today’s learning and use a checklist to determine current student levels of understanding.
Organization and Management Considerations: No equipment needed; outdoor space (playground).
Opening for Learning
Indicators: Learning Experiences:
(cid:129) Sustain participation in moderate to Invite the children to “follow me” walking and running through the play-
vigorous locomotor activities (e.g., ground, around playground equipment, and on different surfaces. Do this for
walking, snowshoeing, running, about fi ve minutes, ending with running.
dancing, hiking, swimming,
(Example of adaptation: Assign a partner to move with student needing
parachute play) and lead-up games
assistance.)
(e.g., tag games, follow-the-leader) that
increase heart rate and respiration
rate, working towards fi ve consecutive
minutes on a consistent basis. (1.1)
(cid:129) Walk, forward and backward, and run,
forward, through general space trying
to not make contact with others, and
stop on signal without falling down.
(1.3)
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6 23
--- PAGE 34 ---
Sample Lesson Plan
Sample Lesson Plan - Grade 1 (continued)
Development of Learning
Indicators: Learning Experiences:
(cid:129) Identify changes in the body that are (cid:129) Immediately after stopping the “Opening for Learning”, ask the students
natural and safe reactions to questions related to exercising. “With your hand on your chest, what do
participating in moderate to vigorous you feel happening to your heart? Is this a good thing to have happen when
movement activities (e.g., heart beats we are exercising?” “Who is breathing faster? Why are we breathing
faster, body is sweating, breathing is faster? Is this a good thing to have happen when we are exercising?” “Does
faster, skin gets red, body feels warm/ anyone feel hot? Is this a good thing to have happen when we are
hot). (1.1) exercising?” Assure students that these body reactions are all natural and
(cid:129) Demonstrate a willingness to try to safe.
apply discussed strategies for playing a (cid:129) Move to asking children what roles they were playing when class fi rst
variety of games (e.g., take turns being started. Leader: “What does a leader do?” “What does everyone else do?”
the leader in follow-the-leader). (1.8) “Should everyone get a chance to be the leader?” “What does it mean to
(cid:129) Assume responsibility for various take turns?” “How can we make sure that everyone is having fun and that
roles (e.g., leader, follow, “it,” everyone is safe and does not get hurt when we are playing follow-the-
not it”) while partcipating in low- leader?”
organizational games and activities. (cid:129) Divide the class into small gorups (three to four) and assign a leader for
(1.8) each. Instruct groups to follow the leaders, who will walk and/or run
(cid:129) Explore and demonstrate a variety of in creative ways until they hear the whistle (about 30 seconds). When
ways to travel through space (e.g., students hear the whistle, they switch leaders. Assure students that everyone
imitate motorized and non-motorized will get a turn at being the leader. Give them boundaries and tell them to
vehicles, imitate animals, imitate watch out for other groups as they move through the general space.
athletes) without contacting others. (cid:129) Have students feel their hearts beating in their chests again. Ask students if
(1.3) this faster heart rate is natural and safe. Remind them of some of the other
natural and safe reactions when exercising.
(cid:129) Ask the children what other ways they can move through space. Have some
of them demonstrate. Invite them to play follow-the-leader again, but this
time, as they lead, they can explore creative ways to move as they move
safely through general space.
Closure for Learning
Pose questions and/or provide needed information to reinforce the lesson focus
(cid:129) We want to be able to move in ways for longer periods of time, challenging our hearts to beat faster and quickening our
breathing. This is good for our bodies. This will help us to be healthy. We all want to be working towards being able to
keep our bodies moving for at least fi ve minutes. Tomorrow we will feel what that means.
(cid:129) Walking and running, and many other ways of moving, are good for our bodies.
(cid:129) Playing games like follow-the-leader is a fun way to help our bodies be healthy.
(cid:129) When we play and work with others, we should take turns at being both a leader and a follower.
(cid:129) It is important when we are moving among others in general space that we are careful to not bump into other people.
Refl ection: If students do not know or cannot do the learning focus of this lesson, what will I do?
24 PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6
--- PAGE 35 ---
Sample Lesson Plan
SSaammppllee LLeessssoonn PPllaann -- GGrraaddee 33
Date:
Outcome Focus: Active Living (3.2)
Non-locomotor Skills (3.4)
Movement Variables (3.6)
Learning Focus (Indicators):
(cid:129) Explain how participation in movement activities can help one grow as a creative thinker, a performer, a problem solver,
and a person with confi dence. (3.2)
(cid:129) Use performance words (e.g., “arms straight out to the side,” “chin up,” “feet tight together”) to demonstrate under-
standing of performance cues language connected to skilful non-locomotor movement. (3.4)
(cid:129) Design and demonstrate, with a partner, a variety of statues (balances) of different shapes with one person bearing all or
part of the weight of the partner and focussing on being as stable as possible. (3.6)
(cid:129) Identify adjustments (e.g., lowering the centre of gravity, extending free body parts for stability) needed, using
performance cues language, to improve performance in teacher and/or classmate demonstrated balances. (3.6)
Assessment and Evaluation: Check for understanding by questioning throughout the lesson. Use a checklist of balance per-
formance cues to determine each student’s understanding of skilful balancing. Begin tomorrow’s class with partner balance
demonstration. Record anecdotal notes on each student’s understanding of a balance problem and how to solve it.
Organization and Management Considerations: Use mats (one per partnership) and tell students to remove their shoes
and socks while on the mats (safety and comfort).
Opening for Learning
Indicators: Learning Experiences:
(cid:129) Design and demonstrate, with a (cid:129) As students enter the gym, tell them to join with their “up and down”
partner, a variety of statues (balances) buddy (pre-established partnership of similar size children) and working
of different shapes with one person together, place a mat in their own space on the gym fl oor.
bearing all the weight of the partner (cid:129) Tell students to work with their partners to create statues (balances) of
and focussing on being as stable as different shapes with one person bearing all or part of the weight of the
possible. (3.6) partner (demonstrate an example using a partnership of students).
(Examples of Adaptations: Provide physical supports, such as a sturdy chair,
for a student with a physical disability that affects balance. The student can
hold onto the chair while experimenting with balance positions.)
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6 25
--- PAGE 36 ---
Sample Lesson Plan
Sample Lesson Plan - Grade 3 (continued)
Development of Learning
Indicators: Learning Experiences:
(cid:129) Explain how participation in (cid:129) Bring students together and ask them what skills they needed to use to
movement activities can help one grow create their statues. Lead them to answers such as creative thinking and
as a creative thinker, a performer, a problem solving.
problem solver, and a person with (cid:129) Ask some partnerships to demonstrate their statues. Comment on positive
confi dence. (3.2) aspects of their balances using performance cue language (e.g., solid base of
(cid:129) Use performance words (e.g., arms support). Ask students to contribute other comments, encouraging them to
straight out to the side,” “chin up,” use the language of movement.
“feet tight together”) to demonstrate (cid:129) Verbally review and demonstrate the performance cues for a skilful balance,
understanding of performance cues then have students repeat the words and mimic the demonstration.
language connected to skilful non- (cid:129) Join two sets of partners to demonstrate their statues. The teacher models
locomotor movement. (3.4) feedback to the demonstrating pair of students. Instruct the pair to express
(cid:129) Design and demonstrate, with a what they are doing with their bodies as they demonstrate, using
partner, a variety of statues (balances) performance cues.
of different shapes with one person (cid:129) Tell the viewing partners to provide helpful feedback to the demonstrating
bearing all or part of the weight of the partnership.
partner and focussing on being as (cid:129) Circulate among the students, listening to their conversation and posing
stable as possible. (3.6) questions to support learning as needed.
(cid:129) Identify adjustments (e.g., lowering (cid:129) Bring students together and ask them what made the balancing more
the centre of gravity, extending free challenging when they were creating the statues with their partners as
body parts for stability) needed, using opposed to balancing alone. Discuss their ideas and ask for possible
performance cues language, to solutions to strengthen the stability and creativity of their partner statues.
improve performance in teacher and/or (cid:129) Tell students to work in pairs again to make the most creative, stable statues
classmate demonstrated balances. (3.6) possible.
(cid:129) Circulate among the students, listening to their conversation and posing
questions to support learning as needed.
(The teacher will want to plan for adaptations and extensions in this
section.)
Closure for Learning
Pose questions and/or provide needed information to reinforce the lesson focus
(cid:129) Review the performance cues that will support students’ understanding of how to perform a skilful balance, with a
specifi c emphasis on partner balance considerations (e.g., base of support, centre of gravity).
(cid:129) Ask students to think about one problem they faced in trying to create stable partner statues and how they solved the
problem. Tell them that in class tomorrow they will demonstrate their best partner statue, share one problem, and
explain how they solved it.
Refl ection: If students do not know or cannot do the learning focus of this lesson, what will I do?
26 PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6
--- PAGE 37 ---
Sample Lesson Plan
Sample Lesson Plan - Grade 5
Date:
Outcome Focus: Complex Skills (5.3)
Health-Related Fitness (5.1)
Social Skills (5.10)
Learning Focus (Indicators):
(cid:129) Perform established modern, folk, cultural/multicultural dances, such as the polka from the German culture, the two-
step and square dance from various cultures. (5.3)
(cid:129) Sustain participation in moderate to vigorous movement activities to increase heart rate and respiration rate, building
towards nine consecutive minutes of activity on a consistent basis. (5.1)
(cid:129) Demonstrate and practise ways to fi nd pulse and determine heart rate, before, during, and after exercise. (5.1)
(cid:129) Self -assess level of social skills on a regular basis through methods such as responding to prompts in learning logs or
journals. (5.10)
(cid:129) Acknowledge when own behaviour is irresponsible and/or lacking in self-control. (5.10)
Assessment and Evaluation: Check for understanding by questioning throughout the lesson. Use anecdotal records to re-
cord the specifi cs of students who are having diffi culty with the steps and rhythm of the dance, as well as those who are not
able to sustain moderate to vigorous physical activity. Assign learning log responses to pre-distributed prompts regarding
social skills self-assessment.
Organization and Management Considerations: use music, DVD player.
Opening for Learning
Indicators: Learning Experiences:
(cid:129) Perform established modern, folk, (cid:129) Have music playing when the students enter the learning space.
cultural/multicultural dances, such as (cid:129) Ask students to join with a partner, or to move on their own, using the
the polka from the German culture, polka steps that they learned during the previous two lessons.
the two-step and square dance from (cid:129) Encourage students to sustain their dancing for the duration of the music,
various cultures. (5.3) trying to stay moderately to vigorously active for over six minutes.
(cid:129) Sustain participation in moderate to
vigorous movement activities. (5.1) [Examples of Adaptations: For a student with limited leg mobility, adapt
the movement so it can be done from a seated position (e.g., moving arms
at a moderate to vigorous level in time to the rhythm of the music). Have
a partner polka on the spot facing the student with the limited mobility].
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6 27
--- PAGE 38 ---
Sample Lesson Plan - Grade 5
Development of Learning
Indicators: Learning Experiences:
(cid:129) Perform established modern, folk, (cid:129) Prior to the music ending, turn it down slightly and tell the students that as
cultural/multicultural dances, such as soon as the music stops, they should fi nd their pulse using one of the
the polka from the German culture, previously taught and practised methods.
the two-step and square dance from (cid:129) After counting their pulse (time 15 seconds for them), tell the students to
various cultures. (5.3) check the one-minute Heart Rate Conversion chart (which each
(cid:129) Demonstrate and practise ways to fi nd student made in math class) showing a range of numbers multipled
pulse and determine heart rate by four to equal a rate per minute. Discuss some of the heart rate
before and after exercise. (5.1) numbers, referring to target heart rate, and ask whether students think this
(cid:129) Self-assess level of social skills on a type of dancing would be a good option to include in the class
regular basis through methods such as plan for achieving individualized goals for cardiovascular improvement.
responding to prompts in learning (cid:129) Introduce the two-step dance, using a whole-to part-to-whole approach.
logs or journals. (5.10) First, show the full movement in time to music. Second, with a partner,
(cid:129) Acknowledge when own behaviour is break the dance steps down into smaller segments, using a slower pace.
irresponsible and/or lacking in self- Next, students move independently to the music, practising the steps, and
control. (5.10) fi nally, students try the full dance to the rhythm of the music while dancing
with a partner.
(cid:129) While the students are practising, question them on the fi ve levels of
social skills to reinforce their understanding of the levels. Ask, “When you
were practising the steps alone, what level of social skills were you
displaying?” “When you are dancing with a parnter, and possibly helping
them, at what level are you performing?”
(cid:129) Circulate among the students to provide individual and partner feedback.
(cid:129) If necessary, discuss with individuals behaviours that are irresponsible and/
or lacking self-control. Ask the students how they could change their
behaviour to move up the social skills levels.
(The teacher will want to plan for adaptations and extensions in this section.)
Closure for Learning
Pose questions and/or provide needed information to reinforce the lesson focus
(cid:129) Ask some students to describe how they feel physically after dancing. Question them about their heart rates. Lead them
to conclude that dancing can be a good activity to improve their cardiovascular endurance.
(cid:129) Discuss the social skills students displayed while dancing with a partner. Lead them to conclude that dancing can be a
good activity for social experiences.
(cid:129) Conclude by assigning a learning log response to the “social skills” prompts in the logs.
Refl ection: If students do not know or cannot do the learning focus of this lesson, what will I do?
28 PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6
--- PAGE 39 ---
Achieving Student learning outcomes identify what students are expected to know,
understand, and be able to do (e.g., skills, knowledge, and attitudes) by
Grade Specifi c
the end of a specifi c time frame.
Curricular
Learning outcomes are ultimately the subject of evaluation. Attaining
Outcomes a learning outcome may take several forms or be described at several
levels of performance. The level of detail suggested or prescribed by an
outcome should always allow for the professional judgment of teachers
(e.g., providing a series of more specifi c indicators, or breaking down a
single outcome into a number of statements which describe increasingly
complex levels to ultimately reach the outcome).
The outcomes provide guidance for program and lesson planning. Each
outcome is supported by indicators which give the breadth and depth
of the expectation. Teachers are encouraged to build upon and provide
scaffolds so students can develop deeper understanding in relation to the
outcomes.
Note: Within the outcomes and indicators in this curriculum, the
terms “including” and “such as,” as well as the abbreviation “e.g.,”
occur. The use of each of these serves a specifi c purpose. The term
“including” prescribes content, contexts, or strategies that students
must experience in their learning, without excluding other possibilities.
The term “such as” provides examples of possible broad categories of
content, contexts, or strategies that teachers or students may choose,
without excluding other possibilities. Finally, “e.g.,” introduces specifi c
examples of what could be included as part of the learning experience.
Grade K-6 Physical Education Specifi c
Curriculum Outcomes
The specifi c curriculum outcomes for physical education relate to all
three K-6 physical education goals of active living, skilful movement,
and relationships. Not only do students need to move, they need to
understand the hows, whats, wheres, and whys of movement. In the
chart of Grades K-6 outcomes and indicators, all three goals are listed
above the outcome, with one, two, or all three of the goals in boldface
font. All three goals are refl ected in each outcome, with the words in
boldface indicating a stronger connection. These goals are interconnected
aspects of learning that address the whole person in physical education
and focus on creating a balanced self.
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6 29
--- PAGE 40 ---
Active living, skilful movement, and relationships are interconnected
aspects of learning that address the whole person in physical education
and focus on creating a balanced self. Each outcome in physical
Critical Characteristics of an education focusses on an important aspect of the complete physical
Outcome education experience. No single outcome, however, can stand alone as a
learning focus for a period of instruction. Teachers should integrate into
An outcome will
every lesson learning experiences from multiple outcomes related to all
• focus on what students will learn
three K-6 goals.
rather than what teachers will
teach;
In addressing the active living goal, the teacher will lead students to
• specify the skills and abilities,
understand and practise the habits and requirements for developing
understandings and knowledge,
health-related fi tness to support personal well-being. Students will be
and/or attitudes students are
able to express the benefi ts of incorporating active living into their daily
expected to be able to
lives to support their whole well-being.
demonstrate;
• be observable, assessable, and
Building towards achieving the skilful movement goal, the growth and
attainable;
development of children is of signifi cant consideration and the basic
• be written using action-based
movement patterns underlie the movement skills focussed outcomes
verbs and clear professional
and indicators. Participation in movement activities usually requires a
language (educational and
combination of basic movement patterns. These movement patterns are
subject-related);
generic in the sense that they are not limited to any single movement
• be developed to be achieved in
activity. Once the skills are learned, they can be combined in the more
context so that learning is
complex skills used in games, sports, and body management activities.
purposeful and interconnected;
Most importantly, when students understand the movement patterns,
• be grade and subject specifi c;
they will develop the confi dence and competence to engage in “new”
• be supported by indicators which
movement activities.
give the breadth and depth of
expectations;
Flowing out of these movement patterns, specifi c movement skills are
• have a developmental fl ow and
identifi ed for teachers to focus on when teaching. The level to which
connection to other grades where
students should be expected to perform these movement skills has been
applicable.
identifi ed in the outcomes. The words used to describe and communicate
levels of skill profi ciency for kindergarten and grade 1 students are
“explore,” “progressing towards control,” and “control.” Utilization is
Indicators
not used to describe skill profi ciency until grade 2.
• are a list of what students need
to know and/or be able to do in
Explore: This is the introduction to basic movement patterns and skills
order to achieve an outcome
where students will be discovering how their bodies move and how they
• represent the breadth and the
can vary that movement. At this level, replication of a specifi c movement
depth of the outcome.
is not expected.
Additional indicators may be
Progressing towards control: This level of performance “is characterized
developed but they must be
by lack of ability to either consciously control or intentionally replicate
refl ective of and consistent with the
a movement ….Successful skill performances are a surprise!” (Graham,
breadth and depth that is defi ned
Holt/Hale, and Parker, 2007, p.107).
by the given indicators.
Control: The body appears to respond somewhat accurately to the
child’s intentions but the movement requires intense concentration. A
movement that is repeated becomes increasingly uniform and effi cient.
30 PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6
--- PAGE 41 ---
Utilization: The performance at this level is somewhat automatic. The student
can perform the skill without thinking much about how to execute the
movement.
Skilful movement also includes expanding students’ awareness of what the
body does, where the body moves, how the body performs the movement, and
with whom or with what the body moves. These understandings are referred
to as the movement variables. During the early elementary years, emphasis
is placed on establishing a movement vocabulary and on the understanding
and use of movement concepts from each of the four categories of movement
variables – body, space, effort, and relationships. Students will benefi t from
developing a basic understanding of the variables to support them in growing
as skilful movers and, conversely, as students develop movement skills, their
understanding of the movement variables will increase.
Movement Variables Focus
The Body as an Instrument of Movement (What)
Body parts
Body shapes
Body actions
Space (Where)
Personal space
General space
Levels - high, medium, low
Directions - up/down, forward/backward/sideways, right/left
Pathways - straight, curved, zigzag
Extensions - size of movement (e.g., small swing, big swing); distance of
movement from the centre of the body
Effort (How)
Force - strong, light
Time/Speed - fast, slow
Flow - free, controlled
Relationships (With what, or whom)
Body parts - round, curved, wide, twisted
With objects - over/under, on/off, near/far, in front/behind, along/through
Among others - around, alongside, alone in a mass, in front/behind
Safe and respectful interactions that refl ect a consideration of self, others,
and the learning environment are essential while learning and developing as
a physically educated person. The outcomes that focus more deeply on the
relationships goal encourage students to develop a foundation for a balanced
self in the context of moving skilfully and living actively.
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6 31
--- PAGE 42 ---
Focus on Movement Skills by Grade Level
Movement Skills - Developmental Progression
Grade Level Focus
E - Explore P - Progressing towards Control C - Control U - Utilization
Basic Movement
Movement Skills K 1 2 3 4 5 6
Patterns
Locomotor Skills
Walking P C U U
Running P C U U
Jumping forward and sideways P C U U
and landing
Jumping backward and landing E P C U U
Hopping E P C U U
Locomotions
Skipping E P C U U
Galloping E P C U U
Leaping E P C U U
Sliding E P C U U
Rolling forward and sideways E P C U U
Rolling backward P C U U
Non-locomotor Skills:
Balancing P C U U U
Jumping and landing on feet P C U U
on the spot
Statics, Landings, Landing on hands from E P C U U
kneeling position
and Rotations
Landing on hands from E P C U U
standing position
Rotating on the spot E P C U U
Manipulative Skills
Throwing E P C U U
Kicking E P C U U
Striking objects with hands E P C U U
Striking objects with short- E P C U U
handled implements
Volleying E P C U
Striking with long-handled E P C U
implements
Punting E P C U
Catching (Gathering, Collecting) E P C U U
Hand dribbling E P C U U
Foot dribbling E P C U U
32 PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6
--- PAGE 43 ---
Assessment and Assessment and evaluation require thoughtful planning and implementation
to support the learning process and to inform teaching. All assessment and
Evaluation of
evaluation of student achievement must be based on the specifi c curriculum
Student Learning outcomes in the provincial curriculum.
Assessment involves the systematic collection of information about student
learning with respect to
(cid:129) achievement of provincial curricula outcomes;
(cid:129) effectiveness of teaching strategies employed;
(cid:129) student self-refl ection on learning.
Evaluation compares assessment information against criteria based on
The primary goal of assessment
curriculum outcomes in order to communicate with students, teachers,
should be seen as the
parents/caregivers, and others about student progress and to make informed
enhancement of learning, rather
decisions about the teaching and learning process. Reporting of student
than simply the documentation
achievement must be based on the achievement of curriculum outcomes.
of learning.
There are three interrelated purposes of assessment. Each type of assessment,
(National Association for
systematically implemented, contributes to an overall picture of an individual
Sport and Physical Education,
student’s achievement.
2004)
Assessment for learning
(cid:129) involves the use of information about student progress to support
and improve student learning and inform instructional practices;
(cid:129) is teacher-driven for student, teacher, and parent use;
(cid:129) occurs throughout the teaching and learning process, facilitated
by a variety of tools;
(cid:129) engages teachers in providing differentiated instruction,
feedback to students to enhance their learning, and information
to parents in support of learning.
Assessment as learning
(cid:129) actively involves student refl ection on learning and monitoring of
her/his own progress;
(cid:129) supports students in critically analysing learning related to
curricular outcomes;
(cid:129) is student-driven with teacher guidance;
(cid:129) occurs throughout the learning process.
Assessment of learning
(cid:129) involves teachers’ use of evidence of student learning to make
judgments about student achievement;
(cid:129) provides opportunity to report evidence of achievement related
to curricular outcomes;
(cid:129) occurs at the end of a learning cycle, facilitated by a variety of
tools;
(cid:129) provides the foundation for discussions on placement or
promotion.
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6 33
--- PAGE 44 ---
The assessment and evaluation strategies used in physical education
must support teachers in designing instruction that will best help
students achieve the learning outcomes for the grade and help students
grow as responsible, self-confi dent, physically literate, active-living
individuals who will seek out opportunities to support their own well-
being as well as the well-being of others. Assessment and evaluation
strategies employed must measure student learning and progress,
provide students with feedback to use in their plans for growth, guide
the planning and instructional practices of teachers, and provide a valid
means to document and communicate student learning.
Assessment and Evaluation in Physical
Education
It is important that teachers plan for how they will assess each student’s
progress towards and attainment of the grade specifi c outcomes. The
following table provides some information on what assessment and
evaluation should and should not look like in physical education.
34 PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6
--- PAGE 45 ---
Assessment and Evaluation Approaches in Physical Education
What Assessment and Evaluation in Physical What Assessment and Evaluation in Physical
Education Should Look Like... Education Should NOT Look Like...
Formal and informal observation based on pre-selected Informal observations not based on specifi c criteria
and pre-communicated criteria that provide proof of
student learning of specifi c curriculum outcomes
Ongoing individual assessments that focus on the child’s Occasional recording of teacher’s perception of the
understanding and ability to perform as indicated in the individual’s ability to get along with others and level of
grade specifi c curriculum outcomes compliance with classroom rules and procedures
Assessment used to determine individual needs and to Assessment occurring only in the context of reporting
support teachers in making decisions regarding future one summative evaluation statement for all aspects of
lessons physical education
Fitness appraisals that are administered with the results Fitness tests that are administered periodically
being used by students to set challenging goals and by throughout the year with the results left “sitting” until
teachers to plan lessons so as to support students in the next test
reaching goals
Health-related fi tness standards are considered Health-related fi tness standards are considered by only
(cid:129) by students prior to setting personal goals for the teacher, at report card time
improvement
(cid:129) by the teacher early in the school year to support
planning and program development
Evaluation of “fi tness” informed by student attainment Evaluation of “fi tness” based on comparing student
of student-established goals that are attainable performance to health-related fi tness standards as the
basis for determining a “fi tness mark”
Skills tests that Skills tests that
(cid:129) look at the entirety of the skill performance (cid:129) break skills down into segregated movements
through observation over time with students (cid:129) students see for the fi rst time on the day that the
given time and opportunity to explore and practise tests are administered
(cid:129) are pre-communicated and practised within (cid:129) are administered only at the end of a learning
authentic learning experiences experience
(cid:129) are administered in a pre-test, post-test format (cid:129) are “one-time” evaluated tools that focus on
with opportunity for students to plan for and work “number that hit the target” as opposed to how
towards improvement the skill is performed
(cid:129) focus on the process of the skill performance as
opposed to “hitting the target”
Effective questions that challenge students to think Written quizzes and tests that measure basic knowledge
critically and creatively and require students to of rules and defi nitions without any application to
synthesize and apply previous learnings in authentic support the demonstration of deeper understanding
situations. Student responses are received in a variety of
ways (e.g., written, visual, oral)
Assessment based on the outcomes of the curriculum Assessment based on attendance, dress, general
with the indicators being ways that students can show attitude, effort, and level of participation
that they understand and demonstrate what is stated in
the outcomes
“Performance that is to be assessed should occur in a real-life setting, not a contrived ‘skills test’ setting.”
(Graham, Holt-Hale, & Parker, 2007, p.#204)
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6 35
--- PAGE 46 ---
Teachers will fi nd it to be helpful if they map out the sequence of
learnings and the strategies for each specifi c curriculum outcome.
There are a variety of assessment strategies that physical education
teachers could incorporate to gather information related to assessment
for, as, and of learning. Some of these strategies include documented
observations, performance checklists, homework (such as family-
supported recording of participation in physical activity), portfolios, and
student drawings. Teachers should also consider the use of rubrics.
Examples of Assessment Rubrics for
Teacher Use
Assessment and evaluation in physical education must be refl ective of
the three K-6 goals and, specifi cally, the outcomes. A rubric can be used
to determine to what level students understand and are able to do what
the outcome identifi es. The following rubrics show examples of criteria
to consider when assessing outcomes. (See appendix for more rubric
samples.)
Health-related Fitness Outcome (1.1)
Active Living Outcome (1.2)
Level 4 Level 3 Level 2 Level 1
Always sustains Usually sustains Occassionally sustains Rarely sustains participation
participation in movement participation in movement participation in movement in movement activities for
activities for fi ve consecutive activities for fi ve consecutive activities for fi ve consecutive fi ve consecutive minutes
minutes minutes minutes
Insightfully understands Accurately understands the Generally understands the Lacks understanding of the
the basic hows and whys for basic hows and whys for basic hows and whys for basic hows and whys for
supporting health-related supporting health-related supporting health-related supporting health-related
fi tness fi tness fi tness fi tness
Always understands the Usually understands the With prompting, Does not understand the
language of movement that language of movement that understands the language language of movement that
supports personal fi tness supports personal fi tness of movement that supports supports personal fi tness
personal fi tness
Always engages willingly in Usually engages willingly Occasionally engages Rarely engages willingly
movement activities in movement activities willingly in movement in movement activities
activities
Accurately explains what Accurately, with limited Accurately, with much Unable to explain what it
it means to be active daily, prompting, explains what prompting, explains what means to be active daily,
and the benefi ts of being it means to be active daily, it means to be active daily, and the benefi ts of being
active and the benefi ts of being and the benefi ts of being active
active active
Confi dently and accurately Accurately identifi es options With prompting, idenifi es Unable to identify options
identifi es options and and opportunities to be options and opportunities and opportunities to be
opportunities to be physically active to be physically active physically active
physically active
36 PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6
--- PAGE 47 ---
Manipulative Skills Outcome (2.5)
Movement Variables Outcome (2.6)
Strategies and Skills Outcome (2.8)
Level 4 Level 3 Level 2 Level 1
Always uses the correct Usually uses the correct Occasionally uses the correct Rarely uses the correct
language demonstrating language demonstrating language demonstrating language demonstrating
understanding of skilful understanding of skilful understanding of skilful understanding of skilful
grade-appropriate grade-appropriate grade-appropriate grade-appropriate
movement movement movement movement
Always uses the correct Usually uses the correct Occasionally uses the Rarely uses the correct
movement language to movement language to correct movement language movement language to
support the application of support the application of to support the application support the application of
actions actions of actions actions
Always explores and Usually explores and Occasionally explores and Rarely explores and practises
practises movement skills in practises movement skills in practises movement skills in movement skills in creative
creative and mindful ways creative and mindful ways creative and mindful ways and mindful ways
Independently varies With some guidance With some guidance Has much diffi culty
performance of varies performance of varies performance of varying performance of
manipulative skills through manipulative skills through manipulative skills through manipulative skills, even
changes in the use of space, changes in the use of space, changes in the use of space, when supported
effort, and relationships effort, and relationships effort, and relationships
Always applies, with Usually applies, with Occasionally applies, with Rarely applies grade-
guidance, grade-appropriate guidance, grade- appropriate guidance, grade- appropriate appropriate strategies and
strategies and skills while strategies and skills while strategies and skills while skills while participating in
participating in target games participating in target games participating in target games target games, even when
supported with guidance
Always demonstrates a Usually demonstrates a Occasionally demonstrates a Rarely demonstrates a
“control” level of skill when “control” level of skill when “control” level of skill when “control” level of skill when
(cid:129) throwing (cid:129) throwing (cid:129) throwing (cid:129) throwing
(cid:129) catching (collecting, (cid:129) catching (collecting, (cid:129) catching (collecting, (cid:129) catching (collecting,
gathering) gathering) gathering) gathering)
(cid:129) kicking (cid:129) kicking (cid:129) kicking (cid:129) kicking
Always demonstrates a Usually demonstrates a Occasionally demonstrates Rarely demonstrates a
“progressing-towards- “progressing-towards- a “progressing-towards- “progressing-towards-
control” level of skill when control” level of skill when control” level of skill when control” level of skill when
(cid:129) hand dribbling (cid:129) hand dribbling (cid:129) hand dribbling (cid:129) hand dribbling
(cid:129) foot dribbling (cid:129) foot dribbling (cid:129) foot dribbling (cid:129) foot dribbling
(cid:129) striking objects with (cid:129) striking objects with (cid:129) striking objects with (cid:129) striking objects with
hands hands hands hands
(cid:129) striking objects with (cid:129) striking objects with (cid:129) striking objects with (cid:129) striking objects with
short-handled short-handled short-handled short-handled
implements implements implements implements
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6 37
--- PAGE 48 ---
Locomotor Skills Outcome (3.3)
Non-locomotor Skills Outcome (3.4)
Movement Variables Outcome (3.6)
Level 4 Level 3 Level 2 Level 1
Always uses the correct Usually uses the correct Occasionally uses the correct Rarely uses the correct
language demonstrating language demonstrating language demonstrating language demonstrating
understanding of skilful understanding of skilful understanding of skilful understanding of skilful
grade-appropriate grade-appropriate grade-appropriate grade-appropriate movement
movement movement movement
Always applies Usually applies Occasionally applies Rarely applies understanding
understanding of skilful understanding of skilful understanding of skilful of skilful movement of
movement of actions movement of actions movement of actions actions
Always skilfully utilizes Usually skilfully utilizes Occasionally skilfully Rarely skilfully utilizes
(cid:129) jumping backward and (cid:129) jumping backward and utilizes (cid:129) jumping backward and
landing landing (cid:129) jumping backward and landing
(cid:129) hopping (cid:129) hopping landing (cid:129) hopping
(cid:129) skipping (cid:129) skipping (cid:129) hopping (cid:129) skipping
(cid:129) leaping (cid:129) leaping (cid:129) skipping (cid:129) leaping
(cid:129) sliding (cid:129) sliding (cid:129) leaping (cid:129) sliding
(cid:129) galloping (cid:129) galloping (cid:129) sliding (cid:129) galloping
(cid:129) rolling forward (cid:129) rolling forward (cid:129) galloping (cid:129) rolling forward
(cid:129) landing on hands from (cid:129) landing on hands from (cid:129) rolling forward (cid:129) landing on hands from
kneeling position kneeling position (cid:129) landing on hands from kneeling position
(cid:129) rotating on the spot (cid:129) rotating on the spot kneeling position (cid:129) rotating on the spot
(cid:129) rotating on the spot
Always demonstrates a Usually demonstrates a Occasionally demonstrates a Rarely demonstrates a
“control” level of skill when “control” level of skill when “control” level of skill when “control” level of skill when
(cid:129) rolling backward (cid:129) rolling backward (cid:129) rolling backward (cid:129) rolling backward
(cid:129) landing on hands from a (cid:129) landing on hands from a (cid:129) landing on hands from a (cid:129) landing on hands from a
bent-knee standing bent-knee standing bent-knee standing bent-knee standing
position position position position
Very easily applies Applies movement Struggles somewhat when Rarely applies movement
movement variables to variables to enhance skills applying movement variables to enhance skills
enhance skills performance performance variables to enhance skills performance
performance
Always creates and Usually creates and Occasionally creates and Rarely creates and performs
performs sequences and performs sequences and performs sequences and sequences and rhythmical
rhythmical actions skilfully rhythmical actions skilfully rhythmical actions skilfully actions skilfully and with
and with ease and with ease and with ease ease
38 PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6
--- PAGE 49 ---
Complex Locomotor Skills Outcome (4.3)
Complex Manipulative Skills Outcome(4.7)
Skillful Play Outcome (4.9)
Level 4 Level 3 Level 2 Level 1
Always selects and applies Usually selects and applies Occasionally selects Rarely selects and applies
appropriate performance appropriate performance and applies appropriate appropriate performance
cues to refi ne complex cues to refi ne complex performance cues to refi ne cues to refi ne complex
movements movements complex movements movements
Always combines locomotor Usually combines loco-motor Occasionally combines loco- Struggles to combine
skills into complex locomotor skills into complex locomotorm otor skills into complex locomotor skills into
skills with ease skills with ease locomotor skills with ease complex locomotor skills
Always combines Usually combines Occasionally combines Struggles to combine
manipulative skills into manipulative skills into manipulative skills into manipulative skills into
complex manipulative skills complex manipulative skills complex manipulative skills complex manipulative skills
with ease with ease with ease
Always applies grade Usually applies grade Occasionally applies grade Rarely applies grade
appropriate complex appropriate complex appropriate complex appropriate complex
locomotor skills skilfully loco-motor skills skilfully loco-motor skills skilfully locomotor skills skilfully
while participating in body while participating in body while participating in body while participating in body
management activities management activities management activities management activities
Always applies grade Usually applies grade Occasionally applies grade Rarely applies grade
appropriate complex appropriate complex loco- appropriate complex loco- appropriate complex
locomotor and motor and manipulative motor and manipulative locomotor and manipulative
manipulative skills skilfully skills skilfully while skills skilfully while skills skilfully while
while participating in participating in games participating in games participating in games
games
Always selects and Usually selects and uses Occasionally selects and uses Rarely selects and uses
uses effective tactics effective tactics and effective tactics and strategies effective tactics and
and strategies while strategies while partici- while participating in games strategies while participating
participating in games pating in games and and alternate environment in games and alternate
and alternate environment alternate environment activities environment activities
activities activities
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6 39
--- PAGE 50 ---
Safety and First Aid (5.9)
Social Skills Outcomes (5.10)
Culture and History Outcome (5.11)
Level 4 Level 3 Level 2 Level 1
Always considers a variety Usually considers a variety Occasionally considers a Rarely considers a variety
of factors when making of factors when making variety of factors when of factors when making
decisions about care of decisions about care of making decisions about care decisions about care of
discomforts and injuries discomforts and injuries of discomforts and injuries discomforts and injuries
Always discusses logical Usually discusses logical Occasionally discusses Cannot easily discuss
and practical safety and practical safety logical and practical safety logical and practical safety
enhancements with ease enhancements with ease enhancements with ease enhancements
Appropriately applies basic Appropriately applies basic Appropriately applies basic Cannot appropriately
injury fi rst-aid procedures injury fi rst-aid procedures in injury fi rst-aid procedures in apply basic injury fi rst-aid
in role-played situations, role-played situations, with role-played situations, with procedures in role-played
without guidance some guidance much guidance situations
Always and accurately self- Usually accurate when self- Occasionally accurate when Rarely accurate when self-
assesses positioning on the assessing positioning on the self-assessing positioning on assessing positioning on the
social skills continuum social skills continuum the social skills continuum social skills continuum
Always engages in personal Usually engages in personal Occasionally engages in Rarely engages in personal
plan to enhance own social plan to enhance own social personal plan to enhance plan to enhance own social
behaviour behaviour own social behaviour behaviour
Communicates, clearly and Communicates an Has a somewhat clear Has diffi culty understanding
vividly, an understanding understanding of the understanding of the the infl uences of Canadians
of the infl uences of infl uences of Canadians infl uences of Canadians on movement activity
Canadians on movement on movement activity on movement activity participation
activity participation participation participation
40 PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: PHYSICAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM, K-6