ND  OUTCOMES
Participation
•value  both  independent  and  group  work
•learn  to  recognize,  analyze,  and  respond  appropriately  to
discriminatory  practices  and  behaviours
•take  increasing  responsibility  for  their  own  and  the  group’s
work

ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  19
CONTEXTS  FOR  LEARNING  AND  TEACHING
The Primary Years
Aesthetic
Contexts for Learning and Teaching
The  primary  grades  (entry–grade  3)  are  the  foundational  years
during  which  the  basic  curriculum  concepts,  values,  and  skills  are
developed.
Children  are  introduced  to  formal  education  that  provides  a
necessary  complement  to  the  child’s  experiences  at  home  and  in
the  community.  The  primary  years,  the  critical  years  for  learning,
may  be  the  key  to  success  in  all  other  years.  It  is  during  these
years  that  there  is  a  shared  responsibility  for  literacy  and
numeracy  skills  to  support  learning  across  the  curriculum.
Teaching  strategies  must  be  varied  and  always  aimed  at  meeting
individual  needs  and  bringing  children  to  the  highest  level  of
achievement  possible.
To  create  a  seamless,  integrated  approach  to  learning  during  these
years,  it  is  necessary  to  incorporate  concepts,  values,  and  skills
across  all  subject  areas.  A  primary  child’s  approach  to  learning  is
very  much  a  hands-on,  minds-on  approach;  therefore,  experiences
that  provide  for  this  are  critical  to  achievement.  The  primary  child
is  very  interested  in  the  immediate  environment;  therefore,  the
school  environment  must  be  stimulating  and  appropriately
challenging.
Each  child  is  unique.  Within  any  group  of  children,  differences  in
rates  and  ways  of  learning,  in  experiences,  and  in  interests,  are
expected  and  respected.  Individual  differences  are  celebrated  and
built  upon.  A  viable  goal  for  the  individual  is  to  achieve  a  personal
best  as  he/she  works  toward  excellence.  Improving  performance
and  realizing  potential  are  more  important  than  competition  and
comparisons  to  others.
Children  have  many  ways  of  understanding  the  world.  A  basic
need  for  all  learners  is  to  make  sense  of  their  experiences.  A  vision
of  the  child  as  an  active  learner,  building  a  personal  knowledge  of
the  world  through  interactions  with  people,  materials,  and  ideas,
should  guide  all  educational  planning.
Understanding  the  nature  of  the  primary  learner  is  essential  in
providing  a  balanced  education.  Education  should  enhance  the
development  of  the  whole  child.  The  development  of  children  in
this  age  group  is  discussed  in  the  context  of  the  following  five
dimensions.
Each  child  has  an  aesthetic  dimension.  Children  are  exposed  to
artistic  processes  and  products  in  a  variety  of  genres  and  cultures.
They  are  provided  opportunities  to  create,  perceive,  and
communicate  through  the  arts.  Critical  and  analytical  thinking
and  problem-solving  skills  are  developed  and  applied  in  practical
The Primary Learner

ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  110
CONTEXTS  FOR  LEARNING  AND  TEACHING
Emotional
Intellectual Development
learning  experiences.  An  appreciation  for  and  experience  in  those
things  that  constitute  the  arts  add  to  children’s  understanding  of
the  world,  their  culture,  and  their  community.  Children  with  an
aesthetic  sensibility  value  culture,  environment,  and  personal
surroundings.
Each  child  has  an  emotional  dimension.  Children  learn  best  in  a
safe,  supportive  environment.  Positive  feelings  towards  self,  others,
and  learning  are  continuously  promoted  by  the  school.  As
children  move  from  kindergarten  through  grade  6,  they  are
encouraged  to  become  independent  and  more  responsible  for
their  own  learning.  There  is  a  relationship  between  success  and
self-esteem.  Learning  is  structured  so  that  every  child  experiences
success.  Children  are  encouraged  to  become  more  reflective  and
introspective.  They  are  given  opportunities  to  consider  ideas  that
are  of  both  general  and  personal  significance.
Each  child  has  an  intellectual  dimension.  Intellectual  develop-
ment  is  the  process  of  deriving  meaning  from  experience  through
acquiring  and  constructing  knowledge.  The  ultimate  goal  is  that
children  develop  strategies  that  will  help  them  solve  complex
problems.  They  learn  to  reason  and  communicate  effectively,  and
take  responsibility  for  their  own  learning.  They  ask  questions  and
question  the  answers.  They  develop  an  understanding  of  how
human  beings  know  and  comprehend.  They  become  thoughtful
and  reflective  learners.
Primary  children  generally  function  at  a  concrete  level  intellectu-
ally,  and  the  general  progression  from  concrete  experiences  to
semi-concrete  to  abstract  is  the  most  effective  way  of  meeting  the
learning  needs  of  young  children.  Primary  children  are  usually
very  literal  in  their  interpretations,  and  adults  working  with  them
must  be  aware  of  this  characteristic.  Sensitive  inclusion  of  those
with  unique  intellectual  challenges  is  modelled  and  promoted.
Each  child  has  a  physical  dimension.  Physical  well-being  is
essential  to  living  and  learning.  Opportunities  for  movement  and
the  development  of  a  variety  of  motor  skills  are  provided,  and
development  of  respect  for  the  body  and  the  desire  to  care  for  it
are  promoted.  The  curriculum  fosters  knowledge  of  and  positive
attitudes  towards  nutrition,  physical  fitness,  and  safety.  Sensitive
inclusion  of  those  with  unique  physical  challenges  is  modelled
and  promoted.
The  special  role  of  physical  activity  as  leisure  is  considered.
Leadership,  good  sportsmanship,  and  consideration  for  others  are
encouraged.  Children  learn  that  physical  activity  as  a  special  form
of  human  endeavour  can  lead  to  high  levels  of  performance.  They
also  learn  that  enjoying  physical  activity  and  benefiting  from  it  in
terms  of  enhanced  health  and  well-being  are  equally  important.
Physical

ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  111
CONTEXTS  FOR  LEARNING  AND  TEACHING
Equity and
Diversity
Principles Underlying
the Social Studies
Curriculum
Each  child  has  a  social  dimension.  Learning  to  interact  co-
operatively  with  other  people  is  an  essential  life  skill  that  can  be
taught  and  practised  in  schools.  The  classroom  is  a  community  of
learners.  Taking  turns,  sharing  materials,  collaborating  to  solve
problems,  and  working  in  co-operative  groups  for  a  variety  of  real
purposes  provide  opportunities  for  children  to  learn  social  skills
essential  to  living  in  any  community.
The  Atlantic  Canada  social  studies  curriculum  is  designed  to  meet
the  needs  and  interests  of  all  students.  The  curriculum  should
provide  for  the  inclusion  of  the  interests,  values,  experiences,  and
language  of  each  student  and  of  the  many  groups  within  our
local,  regional,  national,  and  global  communities.
The  society  of  Atlantic  Canada,  like  all  of  Canada,  is  linguistically,
racially,  culturally,  and  socially  diverse.  Our  society  includes
differences  in  race,  ethnicity,  gender,  ability,  values,  lifestyles,  and
languages.  Schools  should  foster  the  understanding  of  such
diversity.  Social  studies  curriculum  promotes  a  commitment  to
equity  by  valuing,  appreciating,  and  accepting  the  diverse  and
multicultural  nature  of  our  society,  as  well  as  by  fostering
awareness  and  critical  analysis  of  individual  and  systemic
discrimination.
In  a  school  setting  characterized  by  mutual  trust,  acceptance,  and
respect,  student  diversity  is  both  recognized  and  valued.  All
students  are  entitled  to  be  respected  and  valued  and  are  respon-
sible  for  respecting  and  valuing  others.  All  students  are  entitled  to
an  educational  system  that  affirms  their  gender,  racial,  ethnic,  and
cultural  identity.  The  educational  system  should  promote  the
development  of  a  positive  self-image  that  includes  pride  in
identity.  Educators  should  ensure  that  classroom  practices  and
resources  positively  and  accurately  reflect  diverse  perspectives,  and
reject  prejudiced  attitudes  and  discriminatory  behaviours.
Empowering  and  effective  social  studies  is  meaningful,  signifi-
cant,  challenging,  active,  integrative,  and  issues-based.
•Meaningful  social  studies  encourages  students  to  learn
through  purposeful  experiences  designed  around  stimulating
ideas,  social  issues,  and  themes,  and  discourages  the  memori-
zation  of  disconnected  pieces  of  information.
•Significant  social  studies  is  student-centred  and  age-
appropriate.  Superficial  coverage  of  topics  is  replaced  by
emphasis  on  the  truly  significant  events,  concepts,  and
principles  that  students  need  to  know  and  be  able  to  apply  in
their  lives.
•Challenging  social  studies  exists  when  teachers  model  high
expectations  for  their  students  and  themselves,  promote  a
Social

ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  112
CONTEXTS  FOR  LEARNING  AND  TEACHING
The Social Studies
Learning Environment
The Effective Social
Studies Classroom
thoughtful  approach  to  inquiry,  and  demand  well-reasoned
arguments.
•Active  social  studies  encourages  students  to  assume  increasing
responsibility  for  managing  their  own  learning.  Exploration,
investigation,  critical  and  creative  thinking,  problem  solving,
discussion  and  debate,  decision  making,  and  reflection  are
essential  elements  of  this  principle.  This  active  process  of
constructing  meaning  encourages  lifelong  learning.
•Integrative  social  studies  crosses  disciplinary  borders  to
explore  issues  and  events,  while  using  and  reinforcing  infor-
mational,  technological,  and  application  skills.  This  approach
facilitates  the  study  of  the  physical  and  cultural  environment
by  making  appropriate,  meaningful,  and  evident  connections
to  the  human  disciplines  and  to  the  concepts  of  time,  space,
continuity,  and  change.
•Issues-based  social  studies  considers  the  ethical  dimensions  of
issues,  and  addresses  controversial  topics.  It  encourages
consideration  of  opposing  points  of  view,  respect  for  well-
supported  positions,  sensitivity  to  cultural  similarities  and
differences,  and  a  commitment  to  social  responsibility  and
action.
With  the  accelerating  pace  and  scope  of  change,  today’s  students
cannot  expect  facts  learned  in  isolation  to  equip  them  for  life.
Problem  solving,  critical  and  creative  thinking,  and  informed
decision  making  are  essential  for  success  in  the  future.  The  social
studies  learning  environment  must  support  the  development  of
these  critical  attributes  to  prepare  students  as  lifelong  learners.
Today’s  students  come  with  increasingly  diverse  backgrounds  and
experiences.  An  effective  instructional  environment  must
incorporate  principles  and  strategies  that  support  this  diversity,
while  recognizing  and  accommodating  the  varied  learning  styles,
multiple  intelligences,  and  abilities  of  individual  students.
Teaching  approaches  and  strategies  must  actively  engage  all
students  in  the  learning  process,  through  their  involvement  in  a
wide  variety  of  experiences.  The  nature  and  scope  of  social  studies
provide  unique  opportunities  to  do  this.

ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  113
CONTEXTS  FOR  LEARNING  AND  TEACHING
In  order  to  contribute  to  the  achievement  of  equity  and  the
support  of  diversity  in  education,  the  social  studies  curriculum
must
•reflect  and  affirm  the  racial/ethnocultural,  gender,  and  social
identities  of  students
•reflect  students’  abilities,  needs,  interests,  and  learning  styles
•provide  materials  and  strategies  that  reflect  accurately  and
fully  the  reality  of  Canada’s  diversity,  and  that  foster  an
understanding  of  multiple  perspectives  and  group  and
individual  similarities  and  differences
•address  ability,  cultural,  racial,  gender,  lifestyle,  linguistic,
and  socio-economic  issues  in  an  accurate,  respectful,  fair,
analytical,  and  balanced  manner
•reflect  the  variety  of  roles  and  wide  range  of  experiences
available  to  all  members  of  society
•promote  the  concept  that  all  people  should  have  equal  access
to  opportunity  and  outcomes
•expect  that  all  students  will  be  successful,  regardless  of
gender,  racial,  ethnocultural  or  socio-economic  background,
lifestyle,  or  ability
•include  assessment  and  evaluation  tools  and  practices  that
take  into  account  gender,  ability,  learning  styles,  and  the
diverse  racial,  cultural,  and  linguistic  backgrounds  of
students.
To  establish  and  maintain  an  effective  social  studies  environment,
teachers  must
•recognize  students  as  being  intelligent  in  a  number  of
different  ways,  and  encourage  them  to  explore  other  ways  of
knowing,  both  inside  and  beyond  the  classroom
•value  the  inclusive  classroom  and  engage  all  learners  in
meaningful  activities
•acknowledge  and  value  the  ways  in  which  gender,  race,
ethnicity,  and  culture  shape  particular  ways  of  viewing  and
knowing  the  world
•incorporate  new  approaches,  methodologies,  and  technologies
with  established  effective  practices
•have  an  extensive  repertoire  of  strategies  from  which  to  select
those  most  appropriate  to  the  specific  learning  task
•use  varied  and  appropriate  resources  to  help  students  achieve
the outcomes  in  a  particular  learning  situation
•provide  opportunities  to  integrate  knowledge,  skills,  and
attitudes
•provide  frequent  opportunities  for  reflection  so  that  it
becomes  an  integral  part  of  the  learning  process.
Supporting Equity and
Diversity

ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  114
CONTEXTS  FOR  LEARNING  AND  TEACHING
To  create  a  social  studies  environment  inviting  to  all  participants,
instructional  practices  must
•foster  a  learning  environment  that  is  free  from  bias  and  unfair
practices  based  on  ability,  race,  ethnicity,  culture,  gender,  or
socio-economic  status
•promote  opportunities  to  develop  positive  self-images  that
will  enable  students  to  transcend  stereotypes  and  develop  as
individuals
•promote  communication  and  understanding  among  those
who  differ  in  attitude,  knowledge,  points  of  view,  and  dialect,
as  well  as  among  those  who  are  similar
•help  students  explore  and  understand  why  different  people
have  different  perspectives
•encourage  and  enable  students  to  question  their  own
assumptions  and  imagine,  understand,  and  appreciate  realities
other  than  their  own
•ensure  the  equitable  sharing  of  resources,  including  teacher
attention  and  support
•provide  opportunities  for  students  to  work  co-operatively  in  a
variety  of  groupings
•enable  students  to  examine  and  critique  age-appropriate
materials,  resources,  and  experiences  that  exhibit  bias  and
prejudice
*use  the  multidisciplinary  lens  of  social  studies  to  examine
historical  and  current  equity  and  bias  issues
•promote  opportunities  in  non-traditional  careers  and
occupations  for  both  genders
•encourage  students  to  challenge  prejudice  and  discrimination
that  result  in  unequal  opportunities  for  some  members  of
society.
An  effective  social  studies  learning  environment  ensures  student
achievement  by  enhancing  students’  understanding,  knowledge,
and  valuing  of  their  own  heritage  and  cultural  background.
The  Atlantic  provinces,  through  CAMET  and  their  departments
of  education,  are  committed  to  using  accepted  equity  principles
and  practices  in  approving  social  studies  curricula  and  resources.
Effective  social  studies  learning  and  teaching  are  resource-based.
Resource-based  learning  actively  involves  students,  teachers,  and
library  staff  in  the  effective  use  of  a  wide  range  of  print,  non-print,
and  human  resources.
Resource-based  learning  fosters  the  development  of  individual
students  by  accommodating  their  diverse  backgrounds,  various
learning  styles,  needs,  and  abilities.  Students  who  use  a  wide
range  of  resources  in  various  mediums  of  learning  have  the
opportunity  to  approach  a  theme,  issue,  or  topic  of  study  in  ways
that  allow  for  differences  in  learning  styles  and  abilities.
Resource-Based
Learning

ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  115
CONTEXTS  FOR  LEARNING  AND  TEACHING
Resource-based  learning  supports  students  as  they  develop
information  literacy.  Information  literacy  is  the  ability  to  access,
interpret,  evaluate,  organize,  select,  produce,  and  communicate
information  in  and  through  a  variety  of  media  technologies  and
contexts  to  meet  diverse  learning  needs  and  purposes.  When
students  engage  in  their  own  research  with  appropriate  guidance,
they  are  more  likely  to  take  responsibility  for  their  learning  and  to
retain  the  information  they  gather  for  themselves.
In  a  resource-based  learning  environment,  students  and  teachers
make  decisions  about  appropriate  sources  of  information,  tools  for
learning,  and  methods  of  access.  A  resource-based  approach  raises
the  issues  of  selecting  and  evaluating  a  wide  variety  of  information
sources.  The  development  of  the  critical  skills  needed  for  these
tasks  is  essential  to  the  social  studies  processes.
The  range  of  possible  resources  include  the  following:
•print—books,  magazines,  newspapers,  documents,  and
publications
•visuals—maps,  illustrations,  photographs,  pictures,  and  study
prints
•artifacts—concrete  objects,  educational  toys,  and  games
•individual  and  community—interviews,  museums,  and  field
trips
•multimedia—films,  audio  and  video  tapes,  laser  and  video
discs,  television,  and  radio
•information  technology—computer  software,  databases,  and
CD-ROMs
•communication  technology—Internet  connections,  bulletin
boards,  and  e-mail
Resource-based  learning  implies  the  need  to  provide  teachers  with
access  to  appropriate  resources  and  professional  development.
Guidelines  and  policies  for  the  selection  of  appropriate  materials
should  also  be  in  place.
It  is  necessary  that  administrators,  teachers,  oth