ney On -  P.E.I.  Department  of  Education,  2005
Grade1
Lesson Plan:
Introduce students to the tool bar. Clicking on the tools enables you to make
shapes.
Instructions (continued)
If the mouse pointer looks like an arrow you can delete or move the shape that
you have drawn. Put the pointer on your object and click to select it. An object is
selected if the little square handles can be seen around the object.
Once the object is selected, tap the DELETE key to remove the object from the
screen. Point to the object and click and hold the left mouse button. While
holding the button down, move the mouse. The object will also move on the
screen. If you place the tip of the mouse pointer exactly on the handles, and
then click and hold, you can stretch or shrink your object as you move the
mouse.
The fill tools are located below the tool panel. They allow you to add colour
inside your object. The object must be selected in order to colour it. Once an
object is selected click the colour palette and then the colour of your choice.
Young children quickly learn the necessary skills to create a picture. The introduc-
tion of the program tools can be brief with more time given for creation and
exploration.
Have students create an artwork using the shapes they discussed earlier. Houses,
rocket ships, trees, faces, cars, etc. are easiest for beginners.
•  First time users may have
difficulty co-ordinating the
pointer movement on the screen
with moving the mouse. To
assist them, have them keep their
wrist straight and use the
shoulder more when moving the
mouse until they get the feel of
it.
Suggestion
Shapes Make Pictures

Grade1
66
Journey On -  P.E.I.  Department  of  Education,  2005
Lesson Plan:
OutcomesActivity
Activities which encourage collecting, organizing and sorting data, as well as the
recognition of trends, help develop the fundamental skills that will be used with
databases. For primary students, off-line activities (i.e. those which do not
involve using a computer) are used to introduce database concepts. In this
activity, students collect and record information about their stuffed animals. The
class then works to organize the information in various ways to answer both
student and teacher directed questions.
•  Index cards containing fields names
•  AppleWorks: Database
•  Stuffed toys
Technology:  B9.1
Math:  D3, F1, F4
Science:  100-9, 100-10, 100-13, 202-
4
Stuffed  Toys
Resources
Background
Databases can help students to develop organizational and problem solving skills
by engaging them in tasks that involve:
•  organizing and sorting information to test hypotheses and retrieve information
•  discovering relationships and commonalities
•  predicting trends
Terminology - All of the information stored in a database is stored as a file such
as a card catalogue. Information within a database is grouped into records. The
information for each book represents one record. Within a record the specific data
is divided into fields. The fields in our analogy of a card catalogue are Title of
Book, Author, and Date. Every record in a database has the same fields. The data
within a field, differs from record to record. For example, in one record the date
may be 1998, while in another it could be 2005.

67
Journey On -  P.E.I.  Department  of  Education,  2005
Grade1
Lesson Plan:
Stuffed  Toys
Sugggestions
1. Collecting and recording information - Each student brings his/her
favourite stuffed toy to class and is provided with an index card or photocop-
ied sheet containing the field names (e.g. Type, Colour, Length and Name).
Adapt the type of information to be collected to match the students™ skills
(If the students are not familiar with how to measure length for example,
choose other characteristics such as weight (heavy vs. light) and texture (soft,
fuzzy, smooth). If you include the type of material that the toy is made out
of, this activity will fit into the unit Objects are Made from Materials in the
APEF Science curriculum.
2. The students fill in the information on their cards as the teacher fills in a
sample on the overhead projector or on the blackboard.
3. Once completed, the teacher can collect the cards to make the database
complete. At this point the teacher could use the collected cards to explain that
the field name is a place to store one bit of data (colour, length, type etc.) and
several different field names make a record. A collection of records with the
same field names is a database file. A database file can be stored on paper or
on a computer. Students, with teacher assistance, can add their information to
a teacher-created database.
4. Sorting data - Students sort their cards on the floor in rows according to
common characteristics. For example all the teddy bears go in one row, while
all the rabbits go in another. Try sorting in a variety of different ways.
5. Analysing data and looking for trends - Have the students analyse the data by
prompting the students with questions and having the students sort the
cards appropriately to find out the answer. “How many are made with
smooth material, fuzzy material?” “How many stuffed toys are brown?”
“What is the longest stuffed toy?” “How many stuffed toy names start with
the letter M?” More complex questions can also be asked. For example, “How
many stuffed toys are pink and are rabbits?”
Ask the students what are some other patterns or trends that they notice. For
example, what is the most common stuffed toy? What is the most popular
colour of Teddy bear?
Instructions
•  If the reading level of your
students is below that required
to read very much written
information, have the students
use pictures (or stickers) in place
some of the written text in
fields. They can also use markers
to fill in information in the
Colour field.
•  Instead of sorting on the floor,
the teacher can use a bulletin
board and have different
students play the role of helper
when moving information
about.
•  Instead of sorting stuffed toys
sort students according the hair
colour, sex, birth month, pets,
what they are wearing, etc.
Students can even wear two or
three appropriate labels.

Grade1
68
Journey On -  P.E.I.  Department  of  Education,  2005
Lesson Plan:
OutcomesActivity
This exercise is designed for teachers to use at the beginning of the first school
year. Emergent writers can create sentences using a word processor instead of a
pencil and paper. In this exercise students write 1-2 sentences using the core
words of the week. As with paper media, students use inventive or temporary
spelling to complete the writing exercise. Initially a 20 minute session on the
computer is usually ample time for this age group.
A word processor:
•  Appleworks
•  Word Perfect
•  Ultimate Writing Creativity Center
English Language Arts, Entry - 3, Curriculum Guide
Technology:  B7.1, B7.2
Language Arts:  (Emergent) 9.1,
10.1, 10.4
In My Own Words
Resources
Instructions
As the first exposure to word processing, the amount of material that the
students types in is unimportant. Depending on the writing level of the stu-
dents, they can:
•  create a part of an alphabet typing upper and lower case letters
•  enter core words or groups of words focused on a topic such as colours
•  type in phrases or attempt short sentences
1. Students may wish to make use of the Ultimate Writing Creativity Center.
2. Have students type in the first core word.
3. Use the ENTER key to move to the next line.
4. Type a sentence using the core word.
The BACKSPACE, SPACE BAR and ARROW keys should also be demon-
strated to students. Remind them that only one space is placed between words.
Depending on the speed of the students, have them complete a second core
word or insert a picture.
5. To save, Click on FILE and then SAVE AS.This should default to the students
“G” Drive.Type in a file name.
6. Click on FILE and select EXIT THE PROGRAM when finished. Select YES at
the prompt “Are you sure you wish to leave the program?”.
7. If so desired, students can print work out and illustrate it.

69
Journey On -  P.E.I.  Department  of  Education,  2005
Grade1
Lesson Plan:
In My Own Words
Examplar
•  Introduce the keys used in this exercise to the students before the students go
to the computer. This may be accomplished by using an LCD projector. If
this device is unavailable, display a diagram of the keyboard on paper, or on
the blackboard to show the position of the keys.
•  Have the students work in pairs. A good combination is a novice computer
user with a student that has had some experience with computers. Assign
one student the responsibility of “Key Master” the student who uses the
mouse and keyboard. The Key Master’s partner can help find the keys and
point to them but should not touch them until it is their turn.
•  After a set amount of time (5-10 minutes), or after the typing of the
sentence(s) is complete, have partners switch places at keyboard. You may
wish to use a timer.
•  Some teachers find that volunteers or student mentors are a great help when
introducing younger children to the computer.
•  Show students the ESC key soon after entering the program to save yourself
from being repeatedly called to the computer. Dialogue boxes stating that
The cursor can not move beyond the end of the text occur frequently if the
arrow keys are held down too long.
•  In a one-computer classroom, if you wish to prevent constant interruptions,
use a visual symbol such as a red plastic cup that students can place on the
top of the computer to signal that help is needed. When the teacher or a peer
is free, they can help the student out.
Helpful  Hints

Grade1
70
Journey On -  P.E.I.  Department  of  Education,  2005
Appendix

71
Grade1
Journey On -  P.E.I.  Department  of  Education,  2005

Grade1
72
Journey On -  P.E.I.  Department  of  Education,  2005
Glossary
Abbycat: PEI Public library database system
Absolute: a cell reference that remains constant in a formula. Dollar signs are used to force the spreadsheet to keep
the cell reference in a formula the same when it is copied.  (i.e. when the formula =A6/$B$6 is copied the
numerator A6 will change to A7, A8, etc. while the denominator $B$6 will stay the same)
APA: abbreviation of American Psychological Association. The APA standard is used for quoting references for the
sciences.
Applet: An application, written in Java, that can run inside a web page but is not limited by the functionality of
HTML. Java applet and Java script differ that a Java applet needs to be downloaded. Java script is incorporated
in a web page with HTML tags.
Application sharing: a program that is installed on the server computer which allow all computers on the
network to have access to that software.
Assignment drop box: a mechanism for uploading electronic assignment files for an instructor using an online
content management system such as WebCT or ATutor.
Attachment: file that is attached to an email
Auto fill data: spreadsheet feature that will complete a series of entries such as the “days of the week” or “months
of the year”.  (i.e.  enter January, February and select the corresponding cells with the mouse and select “auto fill”.
The remaining 10 months will be automatically entered)
Automated text: database input form feature that will automatically fill a field with a predetermined value (i.e.
current year, telephone area code, etc.)
Background: display behind graphics and text on a web page. A background can be a colour or a tiled graphic.
Bitmap: pixel (picture element) representation of a graphic. The image is made by small dots (pixels) of different
colors.
Bookmark (Favorite): a saved link to a specific place on the Internet.
Boolean operators: logic system that returns “true or false”, “yes or no”, “AND”, “OR”, “NOT”.  These terms
are used to set parameters for searching.
Browser: a program that accesses and displays files and other data available on the Internet and other networks.
(i.e. Internet Explorer, Netscape)
Bullets: a symbol appearing before items in a list.
Button bar: a bar of graphical buttons found in a program that contain “short cuts” for commonly used tasks.

73
Grade1
Journey On -  P.E.I.  Department  of  Education,  2005
Cascading style sheet (CSS): a feature of HTML that allows users to create style templates (sheets) that specifies
how different text elements (paragraphs, headings, hyperlinks, etc.) appear throughout a website.
Cell address: coordinate of a cell. It is represented by a letter and a number such as A2
Cell: the area in a spreadsheet where rows and columns intersect.  Data and formulas are placed in cells.  Cells are
identified by the alphabetical column and numeric row i.e. A1
Clone brush: a graphics tool used to copy all or part of an image.
CMYK: a subtractive color model used in color printing. This color model is based on mixing pigments of cyan,
magenta, yellow and black in order to make other colors.
CODEC: abbreviation for COmpression/DECompression. Software or hardware that compresses and decom-
presses audio and video data streams into smaller sizes while maintaining the quality. (.wmv, .ra, SVCD, MPEG,
mp3, etc.)
Cold boot: powering off the computer completely and restarting it.
Column: vertical section of a spreadsheet, identified by a letter
Commercial ware: commercial software which requires purchase and registration.
Compatibility: whether or not hardware or software will work on a computer.
Compression: process of encoding data, video, or audio in order to reduce its size (.zip, .jpg).
Connection line type: how a c