ng use of this framework, educators must keep in mind that the outcomes 
are intended to develop scientific literacy in students. The outcomes in the following section are 
taken from the Pan-Canadian framework document Common Framework of Science Learning 
Outcomes K–12. 
 
 
 
 

PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1 9 
 
General Curriculum Outcomes 
 
The general curriculum outcomes (GCO) form the basis of the outcomes framework. They 
constitute a starting point for the development of all subsequent work. They also identify the key 
components of scientific literacy. Four general curriculum outcomes have been identified to 
delineate the four critical aspects of students’ scientific literacy. They reflect the wholeness and 
interconnectedness of learning and should be considered as interrelated and mutually supportive. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
General Curriculum Outcome 1: 
Science, technology, society, and the 
environment (STSE)
—Students will 
develop an understanding of the nature of 
science and technology, of the 
relationships between science and 
technology, and of the social and 
environmental contexts of science and 
technology.
 
 
General Curriculum Outcome 3: 
Knowledge—Students will construct 
knowledge and understandings of 
concepts in life science, physical science, 
and Earth and space science, and apply 
these understandings to interpret, 
integrate, and extend their knowledge. 
 
General Curriculum Outcome 4: 
Attitudes—Students will be encouraged 
to develop attitudes that support the 
responsible acquisition and application of 
scientific and technological knowledge to 
the mutual benefit of self, society, and the 
environment. 
 
General Curriculum Outcome 2: 
Skills and processes—Students will 
develop the skills required for scientific 
and technological inquiry, for solving 
problems, for communicating scientific 
ideas and results, for working 
collaboratively, and for making informed 
decisions. 
 

10 PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1  
 
 
Description of the General Curriculum Outcomes 
 
GCO 1: Science, technology, society, and the environment (STSE) 
This general curriculum outcome is the driving force of the curriculum outcomes framework. 
Many key stage curriculum outcomes presented in this document flow directly or indirectly from 
the STSE domain. The outcome statement focuses on three major dimensions: 
• the nature of science and technology 
• the relationships between science and technology 
• the social and environmental contexts of science and technology 
 
Nature of science and technology 
Science provides a base used for predicting, interpreting, and explaining natural and 
technological phenomena. It is one way of knowing nature, based on curiosity, imagination, 
intuition, exploration, observation, replication, interpretation of evidence, and consensus making 
over this evidence. Science-based ideas are continually being tested, modified, and improved as 
new ideas supersede existing ideas. There is no set procedure for conducting a scientific 
investigation. Rather, science is driven by a combination of theories, knowledge, 
experimentation, and processes anchored in the physical world. 
 
Technology, like science, is a creative human activity, but is concerned with solving practical 
problems that arise from human/social needs, particularly the need to adapt to the environment 
and to fuel a nation’s economy. New products and processes are produced by research and 
development through the processes of inquiry and design. 
 
Relationships between science and technology 
While there are important relationships between science and technology, there are also important 
differences. Science and technology differ in purpose and in process. Where the focus of science 
is on the development and verification of knowledge; in technology, the focus is on the 
development of solutions. The test of science knowledge is that it helps us explain, interpret, and 
predict; the test of technology is that it works – it enables us to achieve a given purpose. By 
understanding the relationships between science and technology, students learn to appreciate 
how science and technology interact, how they develop in a social context, how they are used to 
improve people’s lives, and how they have implications for the students themselves, for others, 
for the economy, and for the environment. 
 
Social and environmental contexts of science and technology 
The history of science highlights the ways in which culture has influenced the questions of 
science, and how science in turn has influenced culture. Growth in STSE understandings may 
involve the following elements: 
• increasing complexity of scientific understanding - from simple to abstract ideas 
• applications in local and global contexts 
• consideration of variables and perspectives - from simple to complex 
• critical judgement - from simple right and wrong assessments to complex evaluations 
• decision making - from guided decisions based on limited knowledge, to independent decisions 
based on extensive research and personal judgement. 

PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1 11 
 
 
GCO 2: Skills and processes 
This GCO identifies the skills and processes students develop in answering questions, solving 
problems, and making decisions. While these skills and processes are not unique to science, they 
play an important role in the development of scientific and technological understanding and in 
the application of acquired knowledge to new situations. Four broad skill areas are outlined in 
this GCO. The listing of these skills is not intended to imply a linear sequence or to identify a 
single set of skills required in each science investigation. Every investigation and application 
of science has unique features that determine the particular mix and sequence of skills involved. 
As students advance from grade to grade, the skills they have developed are applied in 
increasingly demanding contexts. Growth in skills may involve each of the following skill 
elements: 
• range of application—from a limited range to a broad range of applications 
• complexity of application—from simple, direct applications to applications that involve 
abstract ideas and complex interpretations and judgements 
• precision of measures and manipulations—from coarse measures and manipulations to those 
that are precise 
• use of current and appropriate technologies and tools—from working with a few simple tools to 
working with a broad array of specialized and precise tools 
• degree of independence and structure—from working under teacher guidance or in a structured 
situation to working independently and without guidance 
• awareness and control—from following a predetermined plan to an approach involving 
awareness, understanding, and control, such as selecting skills and strategies that are most 
appropriate to the task at hand and making use of metacognition and strategic thinking 
• ability to work collaboratively— from working as an individual to working as part of a team 
 
 
 
 
Initiating and planning 
These are the skills of questioning, 
 identifying problems, and developing 
preliminary ideas and plans. 
 
Analysing and interpreting 
These are the skills of examining information 
and evidence, of processing and presenting 
data so that it can be interpreted, and of 
interpreting, evaluating, and applying the 
results. 
 
Performing and recording 
These are the skills and processes of carrying 
out a plan of action, which involves gathering 
evidence by observation and, in most cases, 
manipulating materials and equipment. 
Gathered evidence can be documented and 
recorded in a variety of formats. 
 
Communication and teamwork 
In science and technology, as in other areas, 
communication skills are essential whenever 
ideas are being developed, tested, interpreted, 
debated, and accepted or rejected. Teamwork 
skills are also important because the 
development and application of ideas rely on 
collaborative processes both in society and in 
learning. 
 

12 PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1  
 
 
 
GCO 3: Knowledge 
This general curriculum outcome focuses on the subject matter of science including the theories, 
models, concepts, and principles that are essential to an understanding of the natural and 
constructed world. For organizational purposes, this GCO is framed using the widely accepted 
science disciplines - life science, physical science, Earth and space science. 
 
Life science 
Life science deals with the growth and interactions of life forms within their environments in 
ways that reflect the uniqueness, diversity, genetic continuity, and changing nature of these life 
forms. Life science includes the study of topics such as ecosystems, biodiversity, organisms, cell 
biology, biochemistry, diseases, genetic engineering, and biotechnology. 
 
Physical science 
Physical science, which encompasses chemistry and physics, deals with matter, energy, and 
forces. Matter has structure, and its components interact. Energy links matter to gravitational, 
electromagnetic, and nuclear forces in the universe. The conservation laws of mass and energy, 
momentum, and charge are addressed in physical science. 
 
Earth and space science 
Earth and space science brings global and universal perspectives to students’ knowledge. Earth, 
our home planet, exhibits form, structure, and patterns of change, as does our surrounding solar 
system and the physical universe beyond. Earth and space science includes fields of study such 
as geology, meteorology, and astronomy. 
 
  

PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1 13 
 
GCO 4: Attitudes 
This general curriculum outcome focuses on encouraging students to develop attitudes, values, 
and ethics that inform a responsible use of science and technology for the mutual benefit of self, 
society, and the environment. Attitudes are not acquired in the same way as skills and 
knowledge. They cannot be observed at any particular moment, but are evidenced by regular, 
unpromoted displays over time. Attitude development is a lifelong process that involves the 
home, the school, the community, and society at large. This GCO identifies six categories in 
which science education can contribute to the development of scientific literacy. 
 
Appreciation of science 
Students will be encouraged  
to critically and contextually 
appreciate the role and 
contributions of science and 
technology in their lives and 
to their community’s culture; 
and to be aware of the limits 
of science and technology as 
well as their impact on 
economic, political, 
environmental, cultural, and 
ethical events. 
 
Scientific inquiry 
Students will be encouraged to 
develop critical beliefs 
concerning the need for 
• open-mindedness and  
   flexibility, 
• critical-mindedness and  
   respect for evidence, 
• initiative and perseverance, 
• creativity and inventiveness 
in the development of 
scientific knowledge. 
 
Collaboration 
Students will be encouraged to 
develop attitudes that support 
collaborative activity. This 
will develop their sense of 
interpersonal responsibilities, 
an openness to diversity, 
respect for multiple 
perspectives, and an 
appreciation of the efforts and 
contributions of others. 
 
Interest in science 
Students will be encouraged to 
develop curiosity and 
continuing interest in the study 
of science at home, in school, 
and in the community. 
 
Safety 
Students engaged in science 
and technology activities will 
be expected to demonstrate a 
positive attitude toward safety 
and doing no harm to 
themselves or others. 
 
Stewardship 
Students will be encouraged to 
develop responsibility in the 
application of science and 
technology in relation to 
society and the natural 
environment. They should be 
involved in activities that 
encourage responsible action 
toward living things and the 
environment, and to consider 
issues related to sustainability 
from a variety of perspectives. 
 
 
  

14 PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1  
 
 
Science K­10: At a Glance 
The following chart outlines the K-10 science topics organized by processes and skills, life 
science, physical science, and Earth and space science.  Note that these four organizers are for 
the purposes of identifying prescribed learning outcomes; they are not intended to suggest a 
linear delivery of course material. 
 
                           Processes                           and                           
Skills of 
Science 
Life Science Physical Science Earth and Space 
Science 
 
Kindergarten 
•Observing 
• Communicating 
(Sharing) 
 
• Exploring the  
  World Using 
  our Senses 
 
  
Grade 1 
• Communicating 
  (Recording) 
• Classifying 
 
• Needs and  
  Characteristics 
  of Living  
  Things 
 
• Exploring  
  Objects and 
  Materials With   
  Our Senses 
 
• Daily and   
  Seasonal 
  Changes 
 
Grade 2 
• Interpreting  
  Observations 
• Making  
  Inferences 
 
• Animal Growth  
  and Changes 
 
• Properties of  
  Liquids and 
  Solids 
• Relative  
  Position and 
  Motion 
 
• Air and Water  
  in the 
  Environment 
 
Grade 3 
• Questioning 
• Measuring and  
  Reporting 
 
• Plant Growth    
  and Changes 
• Invisible Forces 
• Materials and  
  Structures 
 
• Exploring Soils 
 
Grade 4 
• Interpreting  
  Data 
• Predicting 
 
• Habitats and  
  Communities 
• Sound 
• Light 
 
• Rocks,  
  Minerals and 
  Erosion 
 
Grade 5 
• Designing  
  Experiments 
• Fair Testing 
 
• Meeting Basic  
  Needs and 
  Maintaining a  
  Healthy 
  Body 
 
• Properties and  
  Changes of 
  Materials 
• Forces and   
  Simple 
  Machines 
 
• Weather 
 
Grade 6 
• Controlling  
  Variables 
• Scientific  
  Problem  
  Solving 
• Diversity of  
  Life 
• Electricity • Space 
• Flight 
 

PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1 15 
 
 
 
Processes and 
Skills of Science 
 
Life SciencePhysical Science Earth and Space 
Science 
 
Grade 7 
• Hypothesizing 
• Developing  
  Models 
 
• Interactions    
  within 
  Ecosystems 
 
• Mixtures and  
  Solutions 
• Heat 
 
• Earth’s Crust 
 
Grade 8 
• Safety 
• Scientific  
  method 
• Representing    
  and interpreting  
  scientific 
  information 
• Scientific  
  literacy 
• Ethical  
  behaviour and 
  cooperative skills 
• Application of  
  scientific 
  principles 
• Science-related  
  technology 
 
• Cells, Tissues,  
  Organs and 
  Systems 
 
• Optics 
• Fluids 
 
• Water Systems   
  on Earth 
 
Grade 9 
• Reproduction• Atoms and 
Elements 
• Electricity 
 
• Space 
Exploration 
 
Grade 10 
• Sustainability of 
  Ecosystems 
 
• Chemical  
  Reactions 
• Motion 
 
• Weather 
 
 
 
  

16 PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1  
 
 
Key­Stage Curriculum Outcomes 
Science, Technology, Society, and the Environment (STSE) 
Students will develop an understanding of the nature of science and technology, of the 
relationships between science and technology, and of the social and environmental contexts of 
science and technology. 
 
By the end of grade 3 (STSE/knowledge), students will be expected to 
• investigate objects and events in their immediate environment, and use appropriate language to  
  develop understanding and to communicate results 
• demonstrate and describe ways of using materials and tools to help answer science questions  
  and to solve practical problems 
• describe how science and technology affect their lives and those of people and other living  
  things in their community 
• undertake personal actions to care for the immediate environment and contribute to responsible  
  group decisions 
 
By the end of grade 6, students will have achieved the outcomes for entry–grade 3 and will also 
be expected to 
• demonstrate that science and technology use specific processes to investigate the natural and  
  constructed world or to seek solutions to practical problems 
• demonstrate that science and technology develop over time 
• describe ways that science and technology work together in investigating questions and  
  problems and in meeting specific needs 
• describe applications of science and technology that have developed in response to human and  
  environmental needs 
• describe positive and negative effects that result from applications of science and technology in  
  their own lives, the lives of others, and the environment 
 
By the end of grade 9, students will have achieved the outcomes for entry–grade 6 and will also 
be expected to 
• describe various processes used in science and technology that enable people to understand  
  natural phenomena and develop technological solutions 
• describe the development of science and technology over time 
• explain how science and technology interact with and advance one another 
• illustrate how the needs of individuals, society, and the environment influence and are  
  influenced by scientific and technological endeavours 
• analyse social issues related to the applications and limitations of science and technology, and  
  explain decisions in terms of advantages and disadvantages for sustainability, considering a few  
  perspectives 
 
 
 
 
 

PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1 17 
 
By the end of grade 12, students will have achieved the outcomes for entry–grade 9 and will also 
be expected to 
• describe and explain disciplinary and interdisciplinary processes used to enable us to  
  understand natural phenomena and develop technological solutions 
• distinguish between science and technology in terms of their respective goals, products, and  
  values and describe the development of scientific theories and technologies over time 
• analyse and explain how science and technology interact with and advance one another 
• analyse how individuals, society, and the environment are interdependent with scientific and  
  technological endeavours 
• evaluate social issues related to the applications and limitations of science and technology, and  
  explain decisions in terms of advantages and disadvantages for sustainability, considering a  
  variety of perspectives 
 
Skills 
Students will develop the skills required for scientific and technological inquiry, for solving 
problems, for communicating scientific ideas and results,