en  explore  age-appropriate  actions  to  practise  responsible
behaviour  in  caring  for  the  environment  on  a  local,  national,  and
global  level.
Students will be expected to
1.2.1recognize  that  environments  have  natural  and  constructed
features
1.2.2describe  how  people  depend  upon  and  interact  with
different  natural  environments
1.2.3take  age-appropriate  action  to  practise  responsible
behaviour  in  caring  for  the  environment
Please  note  that  in  this  unit  opportunities  for  connections  with
science  and  technology  outcomes  are  referenced  in  column  4.
It  is  suggested  that  this  unit  be  completed  during  the  months  of
March  and  April.  This  would  allow  for  a  connection  with  Earth
Day.

50ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
OutcomesElaborations - Strategies for Learning and Teaching
 Students will be expected to
Unit 2: Environments
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
1.2.1  recognize  that  environments
have  natural  and  constructed  features
•Have  students  engage  with  an  appropriate  book  as  a  read  aloud.
The  selected  book  should  provide  examples  of  natural  and
constructed  features  in  an  environment.  Encourage  students  to
identify  and  describe  the  difference  between  a  natural  and  a
constructed  feature.
•Challenge  students  to  compare  a  plant  with  the  flower  pot  that
holds  the  plant.  Discuss  how  the  plant  is  a  natural  feature  of
the  environment  and  the  flower  pot  is  a  constructed  (man-
made)  feature.  Invite  students  to  complete  a  sorting  activity.
Using  a  number  of  pictures  of  natural  and  constructed  features
of  the  environment,  have  students  sort  the  pictures  under  the
correct  heading.  (Two  hula  hoops  could  be  placed  on  the  floor.
One  would  be  labelled  “Natural”  and  the  other  “Constructed”.
Have  students  sort  pictures,  placing  each  inside  the  appropriate
hula  hoop.)  Teachers  may  wish  to  extend  this  activity  to  include
examples  from  national  and  global  contexts,  such  as  mountains,
rivers,  houses,  and  roads.
•Invite  students  on  a  class  walk  around  their  community.  Have
students  use  two  pieces  of  paper  to  draw  one  natural  and  one
constructed  feature  found  in  their  community.  Upon  returning
to  the  classroom,  invite  students  to  complete  a  class  chart  that
will  identify  natural  or  constructed  features  found  in  their
community,  and  explain  why  one  is  natural  and  one  is
constructed.  Have  students  tape  each  picture  under  the
appropriate  heading  on  the  class  chart.
•Have  students  explore  examples  of  natural  and  constructed
features.  Invite  someone  from  the  community  to  speak  and
share  with  the  class  examples  of  places  they  have  travelled,
focussing  on  examples  of  natural  and  constructed  features.
Prepare  for  the  visit  by  working  with  the  students  to  identify
“powerful  questions”  they  might  ask.  Brainstorm  possible
questions  with  the  students,  then  discuss  “powerful  question”
criteria  (questions  are  specific  to  the  person  or  topic,  and  can’t
be  answered  with  yes  or  no).  After  the  visit,  have  students
discuss  which  questions  were  powerful  questions  (gathering  the
most  information  from  the  visitor  or  topic).  Post  questions  on  a
chart  for  future  use  when  preparing  for  a  guest  speaker.
Teacher Talk
In  this  outcome,  children  will  learn  to  identify  and  describe
various  natural  and  constructed  (man-made  in  the  environment)
features  from  their  community.  (Opportunities  may  arise  where
examples  may  come  from  local,  national,  or  global  contexts.)

51ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
Tasks  for  Instruction  and/or  Assessment
Resources/Notes
Unit 2: Environments
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
Discovery  Links
(Authorized  Resource)
Formal/Informal  Observation
•During  class  discussion,  observe  vocabulary  used  and  responses
given  as  students  identify,  discuss,  and  describe  natural  and
constructed  features  of  an  environment.  Assess  their  degree  of
understanding  of  these  features  in  the  environment.
Journal
•Have  students  use  pictures  and/or  words  to  describe  their
favourite  natural  and/or  constructed  feature.
Paper  and  Pencil
•Have  each  student  design  a  “What  am  I?”  card.  On  the  outside
of  the  card,  students  give  two  clues  about  a  natural  or
constructed  feature.  On  the  inside  of  the  card,  students  draw
their  natural  or  constructed  feature.  Students  may  present  their
cards  to  the  class,  having  their  classmates  guess  the  nature  of
their  feature.
•Have  students  create  a  thank  you  card  for  the  guest  speaker.
The  card  should  depict  their  favourite  natural  and/or
constructed  feature.
Presentation
•Invite  students  to  draw  or  construct  a  model/map  of  an
environment  (backyard,  playground,  park)  that  contains  both
natural  and  constructed  features.  Have  students  describe  and
share  their  models/maps  with  the  class.
Big Book
•People  and  Places
“The  World  Outside  Your
Window”
“The  Things  We  Build”
Little  Book
•Postcards  from  Barnaby
The  Nystrom  Jumbo  Atlas
(Authorized  Resource)
“What  kinds  of  homes  do  you  see?”  p.5
“What  can  we  see  on  farms?”  p.13

52ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
OutcomesElaborations - Strategies for Learning and Teaching
 Students will be expected to
Unit 2: Environments
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
1.2.2  describe  how  people  depend
upon  and  interact  with  different
natural  environments
•Have  students  participate  in  developing  a  class  chart  to  look
at  a  natural  environment  under  the  following  headings:
Under  the  second  heading,  students  will  need  to  discuss  how
our  activities  in  a  natural  environment  change  as  the  season  or
climate  changes.  Repeat  this  activity  for  one  or  two  more
natural  environments  (e.g.,  beach,  park,  field,  mountain)  to
help  students  realize  that  different  natural  environments  have
different  resources  (e.g.,  sand,  rocks,  trees)  and  people  interact
differently  with  each  environment.
•Have  students  work  in  small  groups  to  complete  a  word  splash
chart  as  each  group  selects  a  natural  environment  (e.g.  forest,
beach,  field,  river,  ocean,  mountain)  word  card  out  of  a  hat.
After  selecting  their  natural  environment,  students  will  write  on
each  of  a  number  of  stickty  notes  one  word  that  corresponds  to
their  natural  environment.  Have  students  share  their  word
splashwith  the  class.  Teachers  may  wish  to  use  an  example  of
a  natural  environment  (e.g.,  mountain)  to  model  the  activity  for
students.  After  students  have  shared  their  word  splash,  have  the
class  complete  a  prepared  chart  with  the  following  headings
focusing  on  one  natural  environment  at  a  time:
Remind  students  that  different  natural  environments  have
different  resources  that  people  depend  upon.
•Have  students  use  visuals,  videos/DVDs,  atlases,  or  other
appropriate  books  to  identify  various  natural  environments
found  in  the  world  (e.g.,  forest,  ocean,  desert,  mountain,
polar  region).  Introduce  students  to  the  different  interactions
between  people  and  their  natural  environments.  Differences
could  include  work,  play,  homes,  clothing,  and  food.  For  each
natural  environment,  the  class  could  create  a  visual  display  to
illustrate  the  different  interactions.
What We See      What We DoWhat We Use
What  We  See    What  We  DoWhat  We  Use
Beach      Build  sandcastleSand,  water
Teacher Talk
This  outcome  provides  students  with  the  opportunity  to  explore
how  people  depend  upon  their  environment  for  naturalresources
(things  found  in  nature  that  are  useful  to  people).  Students  also
explore  the  interaction  between  people  and  their  different
natural  environments.  (Opportunities  may  arise  where  examples
may  come  from  local,  national,  or  global  contexts.)

53ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
Tasks  for  Instruction  and/or  Assessment
Resources/Notes
Unit 2: Environments
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
Discovery  Links
(Authorized  Resource)
Paper  and  Pencil
•Have  students  complete  a  four-page  book  that  has  a  sentence
prompt  on  each  page  to  represent  each  of  the  seasons.  A  sample
prompt  could  be,  During  the  autumn  in  our  community,...  Ask
students  to  illustrate  the  page  and  finish  the  prompt  to
show  how  they  interact  with  their  natural  environment.
•Have  each  student  write  a  riddle  about  a  chosen  natural
environment.  Students  create  three  clues  for  their  riddle.  The
clues  should  correspond  with  what  people  see  in  the
environment  (I  am  high);  what  people  do  in  the  environment
(You  like  to  ski  on  me);  and  what  people  use  from  the
environment  (I  have  trees).  (Solution—I  am  a  mountain).  Have
students  share  their  riddles with  the  class.
Presentation
•Have  students  play  a  game  of  charades.  Each  student  selects  a
picture  card  of  a  natural  environment  (e.g.,  field,  river,  beach,
ocean,  mountain),  then  role-plays  how  people  would  depend
upon  and  interact  with  that  environment.
•Have  students  draw  pictures  demonstrating  how  people
depend  upon  and  interact  with  their  environment  by  using  the
natural  resources  in  the  environment  (e.g.,  fishing  community,
farming  community).
Little  Book
•We   Wo r k   a n d   P l a y
Photo  Cards
•Working  Outdoors
•Playing  Outdoors
•Dressing  for  Outdoors
The  Nystrom  Jumbo  Atlas
(Authorized  Resource)
“How  do  seasons  change?”  p.6
Cross Curricular Links
Science
•Life  Science:  Needs  and
Characteristics  of  Living  Things
Outcomes  103-2,  100-6,
100-7,  100-5,  and  200-1
•Earth  and  Space  Science:  Daily
and  Seasonal  Changes
Outcomes  202-9,  102-5,
202-7,  103-4,  and  203-1
Technology
•Graphics  Outcome  (Awareness)
A-5.1

54ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
OutcomesElaborations - Strategies for Learning and Teaching
 Students will be expected to
Unit 2: Environments
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
1.2.3  take  age-appropriate  action  to
practise  responsible  behaviour  in
caring  for  the  environment
Teacher Talk
Through  age-appropriate  action,  children  will  understand
the  importance  of  taking  care  of  the  environment,  and
realize  that  they  can  do  their  part  in  conserving  and
sustaining  the  environment.  (Opportunities  may  arise  where
examples  come  from  local,  national,  or  global  contexts.)
•Have  students  briefly  review  their  knowledge  of  natural
resources  from  the  previous  outcome.  Have  students  engage  in  a
discussion  of  the  question,  What  would  we  do  if  a  natural
resource  was  no  longer  there  (e.g.,  water,  trees,  fish)?  Teachers
may  wish  to  introduce  the  globe  at  this  time  to  reinforce  how
important  land  and  water  are  in  our  world.  Engage  students  in
a  discussion  of  ways  that  they,  as  a  class  or  individually,  cantake
care  of  their  environment.  Create  a  class  chart  of  possibilities
(e.g.,  limiting  amount  of  paper  towel  for  drying  hands,  not
wasting  water  at  fountain,  turning  off  lights  when  not  in  a
room,  planting  trees  and  gardens,  using  reusable  containers  for
lunches,  separating  garbage).  Have  students  choose  one  action,
which,  as  a  class,  they  will  focus  on  for  a  period  of  time.
•Have  students  create  a  pattern  book  entitled  
We  Look  After
Our World.  After  reading  the  authorized  Little  Book  We
Look  After  Our World,  have  students  create  their  own  book.
(Teachers  may  also  wish  to  use  the  class  globe  to  reinforce  how
land,  water,  and  air  are  important  to  our  world.)  The  book  may
be  divided  into  two-page  sections  for  water,  land,  and  air.
Teachers  may  wish  to  provide  prompts  for  students  to  complete,
such  as,  I  look  after  (water,  land,  air)  in  my  world  by  ________.
Students  would  also  provide  an  illustration  for  each  of  their
pages.  The  books  could  be  shared  with  other  classes  or  placed
in  the  school  library.

55ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
Tasks  for  Instruction  and/or  Assessment
Resources/Notes
Unit 2: Environments
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
Discovery  Links
(Authorized  Resource)
Formal/Informal  Observation
•During  class  discussion,  observe  students’  understanding  of  the
role  they  can  take  in  caring  for  the  environment.
•As  students  dispose  of  garbage  during  recess  and  noon,  observe
students  separating  garbage  to  assess  their  understanding  of  one
action  they  can  take  to  care  for  the  environment.
Performance
•Have  students  select  one  age-appropriate  action  that  they  will
practise  for  a  selected  period  of  time.  Have  students  chart
when  they  carry  out  the  action  (students  use  a  check  mark  or
sticker  on  a  class  or  individual  chart  when  they  carry  out  their
action).  At  the  end  of  the  selected  time  period,  have  students
conference  with  the  teacher  about  their  action  and  the  results.
If  students  are  carrying  out  an  action  at  home,  teachers  may
wish  to  inform  parents  of  the  activity  and  ask  for  their  assistance
in  helping  their  child  track  their  progress.
Paper  and  Pencil
•Have  students  write  a  letter  to  Earth.  In  the  letter,  students
can  describe  what  they  have  done  to  take  care  of  Earth.  The
letters  could  be  displayed  in  preparation  for  Earth  Day.
Presentation
•Engage  students  in  an  art  activity  demonstrating  how  materials
may  be  recycled  to  create  environmentally  friendly  art  projects.
Projects  could  include  materials  such  as  twigs,  leaves, scraps  of
paper,  milk  cartons,  etc.  Have  students  display  their  projects
and  invite  other  classes  to  visit  their  display.  The  display  may
be  used  in  connection  with  Earth  Day  activities.
Big Book
•People  and  Places
“Caring  for  My  Community”
Little  Book
•We Look After Our World
Poster
•Caring  for  Our  World
The  Nystrom  Early  Learning  Globe
(Authorized  Resource)
Cross Curricular Links
Science
•Life  Science:  Needs  and
Characteristics  of  Living  Things
Outcome  103-2



59
ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
Unit 3: Place and Time
Overview
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
Outcomes
Opportunities  for
Integration
In  this  unit,  children  will  practise  mapping  skills  and  explore  their
community.  They  will  develop  an  awareness  that  the  way  people
live,  and  the  interactions  among  communities,  evolve  over  time.
Time  is  a  concept  that  is  new  to  children,  and  discussion  will  have
to  be  kept  at  an  age-appropriate  level.
This  unit  begins  with  a  focus  on  geography  and  mapping  skills.  In
the  first  outcome,  children  will  build  upon  their  awareness  of  maps
from  the  previous  kindergarten  year.  As  children  use  and  create
simple  maps  and/or  models,  they  will  gain  an  understanding  that
signs,  symbols,  direction,  and  scale  are  used  to  represent  real  places
(landmarks  and  locations).  In  the  second  outcome,  they  will  explore
how  people’s  lives  in  their  community  have  evolved  over  time.  In
the  next  outcome,  they  will  explore  the  relationship  that  Aboriginal
peoples  have  with  place  in  Atlantic  Canada,  and  learn  how  this
relationship  has  evolved  over  time.  In  some  cases,  teachers  may
decide  to  combine  the  second  and  third  outcomes  as  an  integrated
study.  In  the  final  outcome  of  the  unit,  students  will  learn  how
interactions  between  communities  have  changed  over  time.  The
focus  of  this  outcome  is  to  show  children  that  advances  in  commu-
nication  and  transportation,  and  in  the  production  of  goods  and
services,  have  changed  the  interactions  between  communities.
Students will be expected to
1.3.1demonstrate  an  understanding  that  signs,  symbols,
direction,  and  scale  are  used  to  represent  landmarks  and
locations
1.3.2 demonstrate  an  understanding  that  the  way  people  live  in
their  community  evolves  over  time
1.3.3demonstrate  an  understanding  that  Aboriginal  peoples’
relationship  with  place  has  changed  over  time
1.3.4explain  how  interactions  between  communities  have
changed  over  time
Please  note  that  in  this  unit  opportunities  for  connections  with
health,  mathematics,  visual  arts,  and  technology  outcomes  are
referenced  in  column  4.
It  is  suggested  that  this  unit  be  completed  during  the  months  of
January  and  February.  This  would  allow  teachers  to  connect  with
the  100
th
  Day  Celebration  and  Heritage  Day.
•Representation  of  Place  (Awareness  of  maps/globes)
•Map  Components  (Awareness  of  title,  legend,  symbol,
direction,  scale/size)
•Position/Direction
Outcome  1.3.1
•Pictorial  Time  Line
Outcome  1.3.2
Anticipated Time  for
Completion
Geographic/Mapping
Skills

60ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
OutcomesElaborations - Strategies for Learning and Teaching
Students will be expected to
Unit 3: Place and Time
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
1.3.1  demonstrate  an  understanding
that  signs,  symbols,  direction,  and
scale  are  used  to  represent  landmarks
and  locations
Teacher Talk
This  outcome  builds  on  students’  awareness  of  maps  from  the
previous  kindergarten  year,  and  introduces  children  to
representations  of  place  (maps/globes),  basic  positional
language  (near/far),  and  other  relevant  terminology  (legend/
signs/scale  larger/smaller).  Students  will  also  explore  the  signs
and  symbols  used  on  globes  and  maps.  Teachers  may  wish  to
provide  an  opportunity  for  students  to  create  a  simple  model
and/or  map.  (Teachers  should  note  that  students  only  need  to
be aware of direction, not cardinal positions as used in the
authorized  resource.)
•Have  students  engage  in  a  game  of  Globe/Map  Touch.  Discuss
with  students  that  a  globe/map  is  a  small  representation  of  the
Earth  which  is  much  larger  in  real  life.  Use  a  globe/map.
Blindfold  the  student,  or  have  him/her  close  both  eyes.  Ask  the
student  to  touch  the  globe/map  with  his  or  her  finger,  remove
the  blindfold  or  open  eyes,  and  identify  whether  the  finger
landed  on  land  or  water.  Have  the  student  describe  where  they
have  landed,  using  positional  language  (such  as  to  the  left/right
of the  map,  at  the  top/bottom  of  the  globe,  between  the  land,
beside  the  water).  Allow  stude