omputer is linked to a network (i.e. T3, modem, DSL, etc.)
Connection speed: the speed of information transfer among networked devices.
Cursor (Pointer): the symbol used to represent the movement of the mouse. (i.e. arrow)
Data entry bar: space in the spreadsheet to enter the cell data or formulas.
Database report: data from fields specified in a search query sorted into a particular order.  Calculations and format-
ting may be applied to the reports generated.
Database: collection of structured, searchable electronic data (i.e. search engines are data bases)
Decompression: process of decoding or reading encoded data.
Desktop publishing: combination of text, images and graphics to produce publications such as newsletters, posters
and brochures
Display format: the way the files and folders are being displayed in the windows (i.e. thumbnails, icons, details, etc.)

Grade1
74
Journey On -  P.E.I.  Department  of  Education,  2005
Distribution list: a list of email addresses that are grouped together so that one email message may be sent to all
members of the group. (i.e.  all students in a class, all teachers on a particular committee)
Download / Upload: refers to the transfer of information between computers. The person/computer sending the
information refers to the transfer as an upload, while the person/computer receiving the information refers to it as
a download.
Drive: name that refer to a storage location such as C:, G:,  or A:
Dynex:  PEI (French) school library database system
Effect: graphical manipulation that applies special effects to objects (i.e. chrome, neon ).
Embed object: objects (audio, video, animation, etc.) that load with the HTML tags when the page is visited. Those
items will be downloaded and run automatically
Ergonomic: workplace designed for maximum comfort, efficiency, safety, and ease of  use.
Error checking routine: features in a database input form that checks to see that entered data corresponds to some
pre-defined criteria (i.e. ticket number must fall within the range of 1-500, and no two records may have the same
ticket number)
Export: to transfer information to another format for use in a different  program.
Field types: identifies the type of information that is to be entered into a field in a database (i.e. date, numeric, text)
Fields: different categories in a database (i.e. first name, middle initial, last name, street)
File extension: alphanumeric characters located after the period at the end of a filename. This identifies the type of
software than can open the file. (i.e. .mp3, .wpd, .gif, .html, etc.)
File management: process of organizing files into folders and sub-folders and selecting storage medium (i.e. hard
disk, floppy disk, CD)
File properties: detailed information on the file. (i.e. size, date, extension)
File size: storage space taken by a file in the computer system (i.e. kilobytes - kb, megabytes - mb, gigabytes - gb)
Filter (graphic): graphical manipulation that applies special effects to images (i.e. blur, sharpen).
Filters: search criteria that allow particular emails to be located.  Filters may be set with “rules” that provide directions
on tasks to perform with selected emails.
Fixed/locked titles:  feature in spreadsheet program to keep certain cells showing (i.e. headings) while scrolling
Flash: developed by Macromedia, Flash is a software used to create web content that interacts with the users by
providing animations, audio, games, etc.
Flat database: is a single database table structure (i.e. Appleworks, MS-Works) Searches can be performed within this
table but it is not capable of organizing complex applications.

75
Grade1
Journey On -  P.E.I.  Department  of  Education,  2005
Folder (Directory): an electronic storage area that can contain a group of files and/or other directories.
Font: the style of text characters. (Times New Roman, Arial, Garamond, etc.)
Footer: text placed automatically at the bottom of each page in a document
Frame: a webpage that has separate divisions (windows) within the web browser.  The content for each frame area
comes from a different .html file.
Freeware: software distributed by the creator free of charge under certain conditions.
Functions: pre-defined mathematical rules that are available in spreadsheet programs i.e. mean, round, standard
deviation, exponents, payment amount, etc.
Graphics in layers: objects placed over other objects to create one image. This allows for easier editing and manipula-
tion.
Group file sharing: a specific network folder that a workgroup member can share
Grouping: creating one single object made up of several other objects. This allows for resizing the object as a whole.
Hardware: all physical parts of a computer (i.e. monitor, mouse, keyboard, etc.).
Header: text placed automatically at the top of each page in a document
Hexadecimal: a numbering system with base of 16 includes only the digits 0 through 9 and the letters A, B, C, D, E,
and F. Used to identify large numbers accurately i.e. identify colors, network addresses.
Hosting service: service that companies provide to store data on their server
HTML tags: Hypertext Markup Language tags are instructions within brackets < > that tell the web browser how to
display the page information.
Image map: an alternative navigational structure whereby an image on a webpage has “programmed coordinates”
that allow the user to navigate the site intuitively, using the mouse.
Import: to bring in external information
Insertion point: the insertion point is where the next character typed from the keyboard will appear. (i.e. “I beam”)
Interactive syllabus: an electronic course outline
Java Script: a scripting language developed by Netscape to enhance the capability of HTML language
Justification: adjustment of text to ensure that margins will align throughout the document (i.e. left, center, right)
Layer: visualized as electronic “transparencies” which allow users to display and manipulate information separately.
Link (Hyperlink): a clickable link to another file (i.e. web page).
Lock cell: locking a cell will prevent any changes on its content. It doesn’t  hide the content of the cell.

Grade1
76
Journey On -  P.E.I.  Department  of  Education,  2005
Logical operators: used to compare variables such as greater (>) greater or equal (>=), equal (==), less or equal
(<=) and less (<).
Macro: a group of repeated commands that are recorded and saved for later use.
Mail merge: a word processing feature that allows a user to create a “data records” database to record information
about a number of people, and a form letter template.  Based upon a search criteria, names, addresses and other
recorded data are combined with fields found in the form letter.  Completed forms may be displayed on the screen
or sent directly to a printer.
Menu bar: a horizontal bar at the top of a window, below the title bar, that contains drop-down menus.
Microcat: PEI (English) school library database system
MLA: abbreviation of Modern Language Association. The MLA standard is used for quoting references for the
humanities.
Multimedia: the use of several media to convey information (text, audio, graphics, animation, video).
Multiple logins: simultaneously logging into multiple computers on the same network using the same username.
Network: a communication system connecting two or more computers.
Notebook: another name for an individual spreadsheet.
Object alignment: positioning of an object with respect to other objects.
Panorama: a series of picture “stitched” together using software to create a picture wider than what the camera is
normally capable of capturing. Some panorama can offer user a 360 degree view.
Plug-in: an auxiliary program that works within a browser to enhance its capability. The plug-in can be a third party
product. (adobe reader for .pdf, Real Audio, Shockwave, etc.)
Pop-up ads: a form of online advertising that open a new window automatically to display advertisements.
Principles of design:  five universally recognized principles are contrast, unity, pattern, movement, and rhythm.
Used in combination these principles create a esthetically pleasing product.
Print queues: set of printing tasks waiting to be processed.
Publishing etiquette: acceptable guidelines for publishing. (i.e. non-biased, inclusive language).
Record: all fields relating to one “object” in a database (i.e. all information regarding one student)
Relational database: is the creation of multiple tables linked to each other through a common “key” such as a
customer number.  (i.e. a travel agency may have customer contact information in one table, airline reservations in a
second, hotel and car reservations in a third.  If any piece of information changes only one table needs to be
updated.)
Relative:  a cell reference that will automatically update itself in a formula when it is copied.  (i.e.  a formula =A6/B6
will update itself to =A7/B7, =A8/B8, etc. as it is copied downward in a column)

77
Grade1
Journey On -  P.E.I.  Department  of  Education,  2005
Rename: change the name of the file or folder to another name.
RGB: a color model that utilizes the additive model in which red, green, and blue light are combined in various ways
to create other colors (i.e. pixels on a computer monitor).  Colours created on the computer monitor sometimes
may not be able to be reproduced when printed.
Rollover (mouse over): a “change of state” when the mouse is positioned above an object.(i.e. colour changes,
cursor changes, image changes)
Row: horizontal section of a spreadsheet, identified by a number
Rule: a task to perform on emails that meet a particular criteria.  (i.e. send a return message for all incoming emails,
such as “on vacation until ..”, delete message from particular sources, or automatically place mail in a particular
folder)
Save as: same as “Save” but allows user to save a copy of current file under a new name or location.
Save: permanently record data to a storage medium such as a floppy disk or hard disk.
Screen capture: saving a portion of the current screen as an image file to be inserted into a document.  Paintshop
Pro includes a screen capture utility.
Search engine:  a program designed to help find information on the Internet. (i.e. Google, Ask Jeeves,
Yahooligans)
Server: the central computer in a network. (i.e. contains shared data, programs, etc.)
Shareware: trial version of any commercial software.( i.e 30 days) Shareware is also known as demoware, trialware
and many other names.
Signature: text added automatically at the end of an email (i.e. name, position, return address, phone/fax number,
email address)
Software: program or application that runs on a computer.
SPAM: acronym of the words: Stupid Pointless Annoying Messages. These messages are often advertising emails
sent out massively on the internet.
Spreadsheet: a grid which helps you organize data in rows and columns.  Calculations may be performed by insert-
ing formulas. Charts or graphs may be generated from the data.
Spyware: computer software that gathers and reports information about the computer usage without the user’s
knowledge or consent.
Streaming video and audio: refers to a technique of transferring media over the Internet to the user’s  computer so
that it is available without having to download the whole file.  The media will begin to play once a predetermined
amount of data is transferred to the computer “buffer”
Tab rulers: guides found in word processors allowing the user to graphically set and delete tab indents
Template (Master page): a model page that provides a basic structure for adding content

Grade1
78
Journey On -  P.E.I.  Department  of  Education,  2005
Text art: tool found in Word Perfect that allows the user to create text in 2D and 3D formats in a variety of shapes
Text wrap: word processing feature that automatically places the text on the next line
Touch keyboarding: the ability to type without looking at the keyboard.
Un-grouping: separating objects that were previously grouped.
Unlock cell: this allows modification be to performed on cells that were previously “locked”
Vector: mathematical representation of a graphic. The image is made from mathematical equations that represent the
curves, lines, area, color, etc. This form of representation allows for small file sizes while maintaining detail when
increasing picture size.
Virtual reality: an artificial environment created with computer technology
Virus: a virus is a program or piece of code that causes an unexpected, usually negative, event.
W3C accessibility guidelines: World Wide Web Consortium organization that provides standards for web page
creation.  These include accessibility issues (challenged users, slow line speeds, older processing equipment) and
equipment compatibility.
Warm boot: restarting the computer using reset button, Ctrl+Alt+Del, etc.
Watermark: a graphic or text appearing in the background of a page (i.e. the word “Draft” or a graphic of a soldier
in a Remembrance Day poem)
Web Server: a computer that stores data (i.e.: web sites) for the world wide web
Whiteboard: a whiteboard is a shared electronic workspace. Each participant can add text, make drawings or paste
pictures on the whiteboard. Other participants can immediately see the result on their workstation.
Wireless connection: connection to another device without physically connecting a wire.
WYSIWYG: Acronym for“What You See Is What You Get”. WYSIWYG is used to describe applications that let
you see what documents will look like