eds  and  wants
1.4.2demonstrate  an  understanding  of  the  factors  that  influence
how  needs  and  wants  are  met
1.4.3 demonstrate  an  understanding  of  how  communities  depend
on  each  other  for  the  exchange  of  goods  and  services
Please  note  that  in  this  unit  opportunities  for  connections  with
health,  science,  and  technology  outcomes  are  referenced  in  column  4.
It  is  suggested  that  this  unit  be  completed  during  the  months  of
May  and  June.

72ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
OutcomesElaborations - Strategies for Learning and Teaching
Students will be expected to
Unit 4: Needs and Wants
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
Teacher Talk
Children  will  explore  the  concepts  of  “needs”  and  “wants”  (see
Glossary  in  Appendix  D)  by  examining  the  difference  between
needs  and  wants  to  understand  that  all  people  have  basic  needs
(e.g.,  food,  shelter,  clothing,  water,  belonging),  while  wants  may
vary  from  person  to  person.  They  will  demonstrate  respect  for
other  people’s  needs  and  wants  in  an  age-appropriate  way.
•Have  students  explore  the  concepts  of  “needs”  and  “wants”  by
examining  some  common  objects  (e.g.,  pencil,  bike,  car).  Select
an  object  and  discuss  with  students  what  the  item  needs  in
order  to  work,  and  what  other  parts  are  nice  to  have  but  not
needed.  Responses  could  be  recorded  on  a  chart.  After  students
demonstrate  understanding  of  the  needs  and  wants  of  objects,
compare  this  to  the  needs  and  wants  of  people.  As  a   class,  have
students  create  a  web  of  “Needs”  (in  order  to  live)  and  a  web  of
possible  “Wants”  for  people.  (Teachers  may  wish  to  utilize
computer  software  to  create  the  class  webs.)  Asstudents  give
examples  of  wants,  reinforce  with  students  that  not  all  people
have  the  same  wants,  but  that  we  must  show  respect  for  the
choices  of  others  which  differ  from  our  own.
•Have  students  sort  the  contents  of  a  “surprise  box”  into  the
two  categories  of    “Needs”  and  “Wants”.  The  “surprise  box”
may  be  filled  with  photographs,  pictures,  small  objects,  and/or
word  cards  that  represent  the  needs  of  people  and  the  things
that  people  may  like  to  have.
•Invite  students  to  play  a  “Needs  and  Wants”  game.  The  teacher
holds  up  a  variety  of  pictures  and/or  word  cards  that  identify
either  needs  or  wants.  As  each  picture  is  revealed,  students
respond  by  holding  their  thumbs  up  to  indicate  a  need,  and
thumbs  sideways  for  a  want.  Select  two  or  three  pictures  and/or
word  cards  that  students  have  identified  as  wants.  Survey  the
class  on  which  of  the  selected  items  they  would  most  want  to
have.  Create  a  concrete  graph  (use  cube-a-links,  blocks,  etc  ...)
to  demonstrate  how  different  people  have  different  wants.
•Have  students  sort  their  lunch  into  “Needs”  and  “Wants”.  This
activity  may  be  conducted  in  connection  with  the  Health
outcome  W-1.5.  Teachers  may  wish  to  use  this  as  an  opportu-
nity  to  reinforce  that  wants  differ  from  person  to  person,  and
we  must  show  respect  for  the  choices  of  others.  Teachers  may
wish  to  extend  this  activity  to  a  discussion  on  how  all  people  do
not  have  access  to  healthy  food.  The  class  may  wish  to  become
involved  in  an  age-appropriate  action  such  as  collecting  food  for
the local food bank. 
Ì
Teachers need to be sensitive to the fact
that  a  student’s  family  may  be  experiencing  financial  difficulties,
resulting in the need for food bank services.
1.4.1  recognize  that  all  people  have
needs  and  wants

73ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
Tasks  for  Instruction  and/or  Assessment
Resources/Notes
Unit 4: Needs and Wants
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
Discovery  Links
(Authorized  Resource)
Big Book
•In  My  World
“All  I  Really  Need”
Little  Book
•What We Really Need
Poster
•Homes For You and Me
Cross Curricular Links
Science
•Life  Science:  Needs  and
Characteristics  of  Living  Things
Outcome  100-4
Technology
•Concept  Map  (Awareness)
Outcome  A4.3
Health
•Wellness  Choices
Outcome  W-1.5
Formal/Informal  Observation
•Observe  students  during  discussions  to  determine  their  level  of
understanding  of  how  all  people  have  needs  and  wants,  and to
assess  their  respect  for  the  choices  of  others.
Performance
•Have  each  student  conduct  an  interview  with  a  sibling,  parent,
grandparent,  or  other  family  member.  They  should  ask,
What  are  three  things  you  really  need  to  live  and  three  things
you  really  want?  Have  students  record  the  responses,  share
them  with  the  class,  and  compare.  Teachers  may  wish  to  talk
about  the  need  to  respect  the  opinions  of  others.
Paper  and  Pencil
•Have  students  complete  a  T-Chart  entitled  Need/Nice  To  Have.
Students  may  draw  pictures  and/or  use  words  to  complete  the
chart.
•Have  students  write  a  persuasive  letter  to  their  parents  on
something  they  really  want.  The  letter  may  also  express  the
student’s  gratitude  to  parents  for  providing  for  his/her  needs.
Presentation
•Have  students  create  a  picture  or  collage  showing  three  needs
and  three  wants.  Have  students  explain  orally  or  write  a  brief
explanation  for  their  choices.

74ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
OutcomesElaborations - Strategies for Learning and Teaching
Students will be expected to
Unit 4: Needs and Wants
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
1.4.2  demonstrate  an  understanding
of  the  factors  that  influence  how
needs  and  wants  are  met
Teacher Talk
This  outcome  broadens  the  concepts  of  “needs”  and  “wants”  by
exploring  how  needs  and  wants  are  met,  and  the  role  that
services  and  facilities  play  in  this  interaction.  Students  will  gain
an  understanding  of  the  need  for  co-operation  (e.g.,  working,
sharing,  volunteering)  among  people.  This  also  serves  as  their
introduction  into  the  world  as  consumers,  and  to  the  factors
that  influence  their  choices.
•Have  students  explore  how  people  meet  their  needs  and  wants.
Discuss  with  students  that  there  are  many  jobs  that  people  do
for  pay,  but  there  is  also  work  that  is  provided  by  volunteers
who  are  not  paid.  Have  students  brainstorm  a  list  of  jobs
people  do  in  their  school.  Beside  each  job,  write  P  for  paid
work  or  V  for  volunteer  work.  Discuss  with  students  other  ways
that  they  meet  their  needs  and  wants  in  their  classroom
(sharing,  trading,  borrowing,  recycling).  Ask  students  for
similar  examples  of  how  people  in  their  families  or  community
meet  their  needs  and wants.  Point  out  to  children  that  people
often  co-operate  with  each  other  to  obtain  their  needs  and
wants.
•Have  students  engage  with  an  appropriate  book  as  a  read  aloud.
The  selected  book  should  identify  services/facilities  available  in
a  community.  Have  students  brainstorm  services/facilities  that
are  available  in  their  community  (such  as  hospitals,  day  cares,
fire  stations,  libraries,  stores).  Using  a  T-chart,  beside  each
service/facility  have  students  identify  the  needs  and/or  wants
the  service/facility  provides.
•Have  students  discuss  what  influences  them  (e.g.,  brand  name,
peer  pressure,  advertising)  in  their  buying  decisions.  Have  the
students  discuss  the  question,  How  do  you  decide  what  cereal
you  want  your  parents  to  buy?  Teachers  may  wish  to  record
responses  on  a  chart.  Have  students  use  one  or  two  other
examples  (e.g.,  game,  toy,  clothing,  snacks)  and  compare
recorded  responses  to  determine  what  influences  students’
choices  when  purchasing  their  needs  and  wants.
 
Ì
Teachers should take care not to promote any fad, product,
or brand name.

75ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
Tasks  for  Instruction  and/or  Assessment
Resources/Notes
Unit 4: Needs and Wants
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
Discovery  Links
(Authorized  Resource)
Performance
•Have  students  select  one  age-appropriate  action  that  they  can
volunteer  to  do  at  school  (pick  up  garbage,  tidy  book  shelves,
do  errands).  Have  students  explain  why  this  needs  to  be  done,
why  they  want  to  do  it,  and  how  this  volunteer  work  meets
the  needs  and  wants  of  others.  Have  students  draw  and/or  write
how  they  will  volunteer.  Have  students  carry  out  their  action
for  a  selected  period  of  time.
Journal
•Invite  students  to  write  a  journal  response  on  their  selection  of
one  product  (e.g.,  toy)  from  two  or  three  examples  of  products.
Student  responses  should  indicate  whether  the  product  is  a
need  or  a  want,  and  include  reasons  for  their  choice.
•Have  students  write  a  journal  response  on  a  service  or  facility
that  they  use,  indicate  whether  this  is  a  need  or  a  want,  and
provide  a  reason  for  using  the  service  or  facility.
Paper  and  Pencil
•Have  students  use  drawings  and  key  words  to  show  how  paid
and  volunteer  work  in  the  community  helps  people  meet  their
needs  and  wants.  (Teachers  may  wish  to  use  BLM  L-1.6  from
the  grade  1  health  curriculum)
•Have  students  use  drawings  and/or  sentences  to  tell  how  their
parents  do  paid  and/or  volunteer  work  in  their  community.
Encourage  students  to  explain  how  this  work  meets  the  needs
and  wants  of  others.
Big Book
•In  My  World
“Who  Works  Here?”
“Come On In!”
Little  Books
•How Paper is Made
•Volunteers
Poster
•The  Community  of  North  Banks
Cross Curricular Links
Health
•Life  Learning  Choices
Outcomes  L-1.6,  L-1.7,
and  L-1.8
BLMs  L-1.6,  L-1.7,  and  L-1.8

76ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
OutcomesElaborations - Strategies for Learning and Teaching
Students will be expected to
Unit 4: Needs and Wants
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
1.4.3  demonstrate  an  understanding
of  how  communities  depend  on  each
other  for  the  exchange  of  goods  and
services
Teacher Talk
As  consumers,  students  will  need  to  recognize  the  difference
between  “goods”  and  “services”  (see  Glossary  in  Appendix  D).
They  will  also  discover  that  different  communities  have  different
services  available,  and  produce  different  goods.  This  is  why  the
interaction  among  communities  is  so  important  in  meeting
people’s  needs  and  wants.
•Have  students  distinguish  between  a  “good”  (something  they
can  touch  and  use)  and  a  “service”  (a  kind  of  work  someone
does  for you).  Provide  students  with  pictures  and/or  word  cards
depicting  goods  and  services.  Use  two  hula  hoops,  one  labelled
“Goods”  and  the  other  labelled  “Services.”  Have  students  take
turns  selecting  a  picture  and/or  word  card  to  place  inside  the
appropriate  hula  hoop.  Encourage  students  to  provide  an
explanation  for  their  choice to  reinforce  the  concepts  of  “goods”
and  “services”.  Discuss  with  students  which  goods  and  services
are  found  within  their  community  and  outside  their
community.
•Have  students  brainstorm  what  goods  and  services  are  available
in  their  community.  Record  the  results  on  a  chart  labelled
“Goods”  and  “Services”.  Discuss  with  the  children  where  they
would  find  the  goods  or  services  listed.  Have  students  discuss
goods  and  services  that  are  not  available  in  their  community,
and  where  they  go  to  find  them.  Have  them  create  a  journal
response  on  how  we  depend  on  other  communities  for
particular  goods  and  services.
•Invite  students  to  bring  in  labels  of  goods  made  in  their
province  (e.g.,  milk,  potatoes,  butter,  eggs,  honey,  canned
chicken,  flowers).  Using  a  map  of  their  province,  demonstrate
to  children  where  the  good  was  made  in  relation  to  where  they
live.  Teachers  should  point  out  to  the  students  the
interdependence  of  the  communities.
•Have  students  create  a  class  book  In  Our  Community/
Outside  Our  Community.  Discuss  with  students  what  goods
and  services  they  have  and  do  not  have  in  their  community,  and
where  they  would  go  to  find  those  goods  and  services.  Have
students  create  a  page  describing,  (with  pictures  and/or  words),
goods  and  services  found  in  their  community,  and  another  page
on  goods  and  services  found  outside  their  community.

77ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
Tasks  for  Instruction  and/or  Assessment
Resources/Notes
Unit 4: Needs and Wants
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
Discovery  Links
(Authorized  Resource)
Formal/Informal  Observation
•Observe  students  during  class  discussion  to  determine  their
level  of  understanding  of  the  concepts  of  “goods”  and  “services”,
and  of  the  ways  in  which  communities  depend  on  each  other
for  the  exchange  of  goods  and  services.
Performance
•Have  students  sort  pictures  and/or  word  cards  into  the
categories  of  “goods”  and  “services”.  Have  students  identify
which  goods  and  services  are  available  in  their  community,  and
which  are  found  and  depended  upon  outside  their  community.
Journal
•Have  students  write  a  response  explaining  how  their  commu-
nity  exchanges  goods  and/or  services  with  another  community.
Presentation
•Have  students  make  a  poster/collage  using  pictures  to  represent
examples  under  the  headings  of  “Goods”  and  “Services”.  Under
each  heading,  have  students  write  a  brief  explanation  of  where
they  find  these  goods  and  services  in  their  community  or  how
they  depend  upon  an  outside  community.
Big Book
•In  My  World
“Eggs:  From  the  Farm  to  Me”
Little  Book
•Where Would You Like to Live?
Photo  Cards
•Goods  and  Services

79
Appendices

81ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
 APPENDICES
Appendix A:
Concepts in Entry-Grade 9 Social Studies
Citizenship, Power, and Governance
authoritydecision makingfreedompower
beliefsdemocracygovernanceprivilege
citizenshipempowermentidentityresponsibilities
conflictequalityjusticerights
constitution    equitylaw(s)
Time, Continuity, and Change
biasinterpretation
causalityperspectives
changeprimary sources
continuitysecondary sources
explorationsocieties
identity
Culture and Diversity
beliefsidentity
conformityinstitution
culturemedia
diversityprejudice
ethnicityrace
groupstereotypes
heritage  world view
customs/traditions   multiculturalism
People, Place, and Environment
constructed systemsmigration
densitymovement
distancenatural systems
ecosystempatterns
environmentplace
interactionregion
locationscale
Interdependence
connectionspeace
conservationrelationship
co-operationssociety
human rightsstewardship
interactionssustainability
interdependencetechnology
consumptionlabourresources
distributionmarketscarcity
enterprisemoneysupply and demand
economic institutionsneedstrade
economic systemsproductionwants
goods and servicesproductivity
Social
Studies
Concepts
Individuals, Societies, and
Economic Decisions

83ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
 APPENDICES
Appendix B: Process-Skills Matrix
The  social  studies  curriculum  consists  of  three  major  process  areas:  communication,  inquiry,  and  participa-
tion.  Communication  requires  that  students  listen,  read,  interpret,  translate,  and  express  ideas.  Inquiry
requires  that  students  formulate  and  clarify  questions,  investigate  problems,  analyse  relevant  information,  and
develop  rational  conclusions  supported  by  evidence.  Participation  requires  that  students  act  both  indepen-
dently  and  collaboratively  in  order  to  solve  problems,  make  decisions,  and  negotiate  and  enact  plans  for
action  in  ways  that  respect  and  value  the  customs,  beliefs,  and  practices  of  others.
These  processes  are  reflected  in  the  sample  suggestions  for  learning  and  teaching  and  in  the  strategies  for
assessment  that  are  elaborated  in  the  curriculum  guide.  These  processes  constitute  a  number  of  skills,  some  of
which  are  responsibilities  shared  across  curriculum  areas  and  some  of  which  are  critical  to  social  studies.
SkillCritical Responsibilities for      Shared Responsibilities
Social  Studies
Read  critically•detect  bias  in  historical  accounts•  use  picture  clues  and  picture
•  distinguish  fact  from  fictioncaptions  to  aid  comprehension
•  detect  cause-and-effect  relationships•differentiate  between  main  and
•  detect  bias  in  visual  materialsubordinate  ideas
•  use  literature  to  enrich  meaning
Communicate  ideas•argue  a  case  clearly,  logically,  and•  write  reports  and  research  papers
and  information  toconvincingly
a  specific  audience
Employ  active(see  shared  responsibilities)•  listen  critically  to  others’  ideas  or
listening  techniquesopinions  and  points  of  view
•  participate  in  conversation,  small
groups,  and  whole  group  discussion
Develop map skills•  use a variety of maps for a
variety  of  purposes
•  use  cardinal  and  intermediate
directions  to  locate  and  describe
places  on  maps  and  globes
•  construct  and  interpret  maps
that  include  a  title,  a  legend,
a  compass  rose,  and  scale
•  express  relative  and  absolute
location
•  use  a  variety  of  information
sources  and  technologies  in
preparing  maps
•  express  orientation  by  observing
landscape,  by  using  traditional
knowledge,  or  by  using  a
compass  or  other  technology

84
ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
 APPENDICES
SkillCritical  Responsibilities  forShared  Responsibilities
Social  Studies
Express  and  support•form  opinions  based  on  critical•differentiate  between  main  and
a point of viewexamination of relevant materialsubordiante  ideas
•   restate  major  ideas  on  a  complex•   respond  critically  to  texts
topic  in  a  concise  form
Select  media  and(see  shared  responsibilities)•demonstrate  an  awareness  of
styles  appropriatepurpose  and  audience
to  a  purpose
Use a range of media•   use maps, globes,  and  geo-•   present  information  and  ideas
and  styles  to  presenttechnologiesusing  visual  material,  print,  or
information,•produce  and  display  models,electronic  media
arguments,  andmurals,  collages,  dioramas,
conclusionsartwork,  cartoons,  and  multi-
media  to  present
•   interpret  and  use  graphs  and
other  visuals
Present  a  summary•   use  appropriate  maps,  globes,•   create  outline  of  topic
report  or  argumentand  graphics•   prepare  summaries
•   take  notes
•   prepare  a  bibliography
Use various forms of•participate  in  persuading,•   participate  in  delegating  duties,
