d consider the 
English-language profi ciency level for EAL learners as well as their 
prior course work in visual arts;
•     visual arts teaching, curriculum, and assessment strategies should 
be based on best practices and build upon the prior knowledge 
and experiences of students and parents; and
•     to verify that barriers have been removed, educators should 
monitor enrollment and achievement data to determine whether 
EAL learners have gained access to, and are succeeding in, visual 
arts courses.
Visual Arts for EAL 
Learners

16
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
16
CONTEXTS FOR LEARNING AND TEACHING
Technology
Digital technology, including digital images, information and 
communication (ICT) plays a role in the learning and teaching of 
visual arts. Computer and related technologies are valuable classroom 
tools in the acquisition, analysis, creation, and presentation of visual 
information. These technologies provide further opportunity for 
communication and collaboration allowing students to become more 
active participants in research, viewing, responding, creating, and 
presenting.
ICT and related technology (digital video and digital cameras, 
scanners, CD-ROMs, word processing software, graphics software, 
video-editing, software, HTML, editors, and the Internet including 
the World Wide Web, databases, electronic discussions, e-mail, and 
audio and video conferencing) afford numerous possibilities for 
enhancing learning and teaching. Computer and other technologies 
are intended to enhance the visual arts learning environment.
In the primary years the focus for the tools and materials are on 
hand and eye coordination, expressiveness, and sensory quality. 
This way a variety of texture, line, shape, space, colour, and form 
can be used to create different meaning in a visual. Computer art 
should be minimal at this developmental stage. The exploration, 
experimentation and practice in various media and tools are 
important and necessary for spatial development and understanding. 

17
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
17
ASSESSING AND EVALUATING STUDENT LEARNING
Assessing and Evaluating Student   
Learning
Assessment and
Evaluation
Assessment and evaluation are essential components of teaching 
and learning in visual arts. They require thoughtful planning and 
implementation to support the learning process and to inform 
teaching. All assessment and evaluation of student achievement 
must be based on the specifi c curriculum outcomes in the provincial 
curriculum.
Assessment is the systematic process of gathering data on student 
learning with respect to:
•     achievement of specifi c curriculum outcomes;
•     effectiveness of teaching strategies employed;
•     student     self-refl ection on learning.
Evaluation is the process of comparing assessment information 
against criteria based on curriculum outcomes in order to 
communicate with students, teachers, parents/caregivers, and others 
about student progress and to make informed decisions about the 
teaching and learning process. Reporting of student achievement 
must be based on the achievement of curriculum outcomes.
There are three interrelated purposes of assessment. Each type of 
assessment, systematically implemented, contributes to an overall 
picture of an individual student’s achievement. 
Assessment for learning
•     involves the use of information about student progress 
to support and improve student learning and inform 
instructional practices;
•     is teacher-driven for student, teacher, and parent use;
•     occurs throughout the teaching and learning process, 
facilitated by a variety of tools;
•     engages teachers in providing differentiated instruction, 
feedback to students to enhance their learning, and 
information to parents in support of learning.
Assessment as learning
•     actively involves student refl ection on learning and 
monitoring of her/his own progress;
•     supports students in critically analysing learning related to 
curricular outcomes;
•     is student-driven with teacher guidance;
•     occurs throughout the learning process.

18
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
18
ASSESSING AND EVALUATING STUDENT LEARNING
Process and Product
Assessment of learning
•     involves teachers’ use of evidence of student learning to make 
judgments about student achievement;
•     provides opportunity to report evidence of achievement 
related to curricular outcomes;
•     occurs at the end of a learning cycle, facilitated by a variety of 
tools;
•     provides the foundation for discussions on placement or 
promotion.
In the visual arts classroom there should be a balanced approach to 
assessment in which emphasis is placed on the learning process as 
well as the products of learning.
In the arts there are two distinct types of foci, process and product. 
In creating works of art, students are challenged to understand their 
work in relation to others, build on strengths, and consider new 
directions. Opportunities for refl ection and self-assessment allow 
students time to examine the many steps of the process, and consider 
the choices and decisions they have made in the creation of their 
work. In this way, process is afforded equal, if not more, importance 
than product. Learning experiences in the arts disciplines must 
recognize that:
•     the creative process does not always result in a fi nal product;
• changes in understanding and direction can occur throughout 
the creative process;
•     students need opportunities to discuss and refl ect upon their 
work;
•     making connections between their own work and other 
cultural forms around them is a vital part of the process.

19
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
19
ASSESSING AND EVALUATING STUDENT LEARNING
To determine how well students are learning, assessment strategies 
are used to systemically gather information on the achievement of 
curriculum outcomes. In planning assessments, teachers should use a 
broad range of data sources, appropriately balanced, to give students 
multiple opportunities to demonstrate their knowledge, skills, and 
attitudes. Many sources of assessment data can be used to gather 
such information. Other examples include, but are not limited to:
Assessment
Observation
video podcastsfi lm
formal and informal observationswebcasts
online journalsinterviews
samplesrubrics
anecdotal recordssimulations
conferenceschecklists
teacher-made and other testsquestionnaires
portfoliosoral presentations
learning journalsrole-play
questioningdebates
essay writingrating scales
performance assessmentscase studies
peer and self-assessmentspanel discussions
multimedia presentationsgraphical representations
exhibitionsvisual presentations
documentariespodcasts
on-line websitesblogs
Observation in an art class provides a way of gathering information 
quickly while a lesson is in pr
ogress. When the technique is used 
formally, the student(s) is (are) made aware of the observation and 
the criteria being assessed. Used informally, observation could be a 
frequent, but brief, check on a given criterion. Observation may off er 
information about the participation level of a student in a given task 
or in the application of a given process. Th  e results may be recorded 
in the form of checklists, rating scales, or brief written notes. It 
is important to plan in order that specifi c criteria are identifi ed, 
suitable recording forms are ready, and all students are observed in a 
reasonable period of time.
Written assignments can be used to assess knowledge, understanding, 
and application of concepts. Th  ey are less successful for assessing 
skills, processes, and attitudes. Th  e purpose of the assessment should 
determine what form of paper-and-pencil exercise is used.
A visual arts curriculum encourages learning through active 
participation. Th  ere is a balance between process and content. It is 
important that assessment provide feedback on skill development 
throughout the Grade One Elementary Visual Arts curriculum. 
Performance

20
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
20
ASSESSING AND EVALUATING STUDENT LEARNING
Interview
Paper and Pencil
Journal
Many activities referenced in this guide provide opportunities for 
students to refl ect on their skill development, and for teachers to 
assess student skill development throughout the course.
Although not assessed in a formal manner, art journals provide 
opportunities for students to sketch, plan, and express thoughts and 
ideas, and to refl 
ect on their transferable skills. Recording feelings, 
perceptions of success, and responses to new concepts may help a 
student to identify his or her most effective learning style and skills. 
Knowing how to learn in an effective way is powerful information. 
Journal entries also give indicators of developing attitudes to 
concepts, processes, and skills, and suggest how these may be applied 
in the context of society. Self-assessment, through a journal, permits 
a student to consider strengths and weaknesses, attitudes, interests,
and transferable skills.
A visual arts curriculum promotes understanding and the application 
of concepts. Interviewing a student allows the teacher to confi rm 
that learning has taken place beyond simple factual recall. Discussion 
allows a student to display an ability to use information and clarify 
understanding. Interviews may be brief discussions between teacher 
and student, or they may be more extensive and include student, 
parent, and teacher. Such conferences allow a student to be proactive 
in displaying understanding. It is helpful for students to know 
which criteria will be used to assess formal interviews. The interview 
technique provides an opportunity to students whose verbal   
presentation skills are stronger than their written skills.
These techniques can be formative or summative. Several visual arts 
curriculum outcomes call for displaying ideas, plans, conclusions, 
and/or the results of research, and can be in written form for display 
or for teacher assessment. Whether the task promotes learning, or 
is a fi nal statement, students should know the expectations for the 
exercise and the rubric by which it will be assessed.
The curriculum for the Grade One Elementary Visual Arts includes 
outcomes that require students to analyse and interpret information, 
to identify relationships, to work in teams, to critically refl ect, and 
to communicate information. Many of these activities are best 
displayed and assessed through presentations, which can be given as 
an exhibition, orally, in written/pictorial form, by project summary, 
or by using digital technology. Whatever the level of complexity or 
format used, it is important to consider the curriculum outcomes 
as a guide to assessing the presentation. The outcomes indicate 
the process, concepts, and context for which and about which a 
presentation is made.
Presentation 

21
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
21
ASSESSING AND EVALUATING STUDENT LEARNING
Portfolio
Portfolios offer another option for assessing student progress in 
meeting visual art curriculum outcomes over a more extended 
period of time. This form of assessment allows the student to be 
central in the process. Decisions about the portfolio and its contents 
can be made by the student. What is placed in the portfolio, the 
criteria for selection, how the portfolio is used, how and where 
it is stored, and how it is evaluated are some of the questions to 
consider when planning to collect and display student work in this 
way. The portfolio should provide a long-term record of growth in 
learning and skills. This record of growth is important for individual 
refl ection and self-assessment, but it is also important to share with 
others. For many students, it is exciting to review a portfolio and see 
the record of growth over time. 
Assessment should refl ect the full range of student learning in the
Grade One Elementary Visual Arts curriculum; involve the use of 
a variety of information-gathering strategies that allow teachers to 
address students’ diverse backgrounds, learning styles, and needs; 
and provide students a variety of opportunities to demonstrate their 
learning.
The variety of assessment strategies should:
•     enable teachers to assess and describe student achievement across  
the curriculum;
•     provide information about how students learn, as well as what 
they learn;
•     take into consideration students’ abilities to both learn and apply 
their learning;
•     enable teachers to observe overall performance;
•     refl ect curriculum balance and emphasis;
•     refl ect that experimentation, risk taking, and creativity are 
valued;
•     enable students to discover their own interests, strengths, and 
weaknesses;
•     enhance skills in cooperative and collaborative projects;
•     allow for description of students’ progress in terms of 
increased control, depth of understanding, and ability to work 
independently.
•     enable students in assessing, refl ecting upon, and improving 
their own learning;
•     encourage students to take responsibility for their own growth;
•     engage students in assessing their own and others’ skills in 
cooperative and collaborative projects;
•     allow for description of students’ progress in terms of 
increased control, depth of understanding, and ability to work 
independently.
A rubric clearly articulates specifi c criteria that help support and 
guide students in their learning. Using a student-friendly rubric 
early in the learning experience will help identify the processes and 
content required in their art work. It supports meaningful feedback
Rubric

22
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
22
ASSESSING AND EVALUATING STUDENT LEARNING
Reporting
and critique, so they can improve and refi ne the quality of their art 
work both during and at the end of the creative and critical viewing 
processes.
Evaluation in visual arts emphasizes analysing assessment activities 
that incorporate self- expression, creativity, risk-taking, skills, 
perspectives, collaboration, and knowledge when creating, 
presenting, refl ecting, critically viewing, and responding.
Evaluation involves teachers, students, parents, experts, and others in 
analysing, refl ecting and responding to the art-making and insights 
provided through the student’s learnings in the creative art-making 
and critical viewing processes. This would be gathered and shared in 
a variety of ways. The processes for the following are:
Creative Process
•     challenging and inspiring
•     imagining and generating
•     planning and focusing
•     exploring and experimenting
•     producing and preliminary work
•     revising and refi ning
•     presenting, performing, and sharing
•     refl ecting and evaluating
Critical viewing process
 1.    describing   2.    analysing
 3.    interpreting  4.    evaluating
Evaluation is conducted within the context of the outcomes, which 
should be clearly understood by learners before teaching and 
evaluation take place. Students must understand the basis on which 
they will be evaluated, and what teachers expect of them. 
Reporting on st