ide (1998) states that technology can be used
to facilitate the learning of science and recommends
that technology should have a major role in the teach-
ing and learning of science. APEF proposes the fol-
lowing guidelines for the implementation of technolo-
gies in the teaching and learning of science
•tutorial software should engage students in mean-
ingful interactive dialogue and creatively employ
graphs,  sound,  and  simulations  to  promote  ac-
quisition of facts and skills, promote concept learn-
ing and enhance understanding
•simulation  software  should  provide  opportuni-
ties to explore concepts and models that are not
readily accessible in the laboratory ( e.g., those that
require hazardous materials, unavailable equipment,
or more time than is possible in real-time class-
room. )
•analog-digital interface technology should be used
to permit students to collect and analyse data as
scientists do, and perform observations over long
periods of time, enabling experiments that other-
wise would be impractical
•databases and spreadsheets should be used to fa-
cilitate the analysis of data by organizing and visu-
ally displaying information
•networking among students and teachers should
be encouraged to permit students to emulate the
way scientists work and to reduce teacher isolation
•using tools such as the World Wide Web should
be encouraged as it provides instant access to an
incredible wealth of information on any imagina-
ble topic
11
Adapted from APEF Foundation Guide for Sci-
ence Curriculum (1998) page 44
Adapted from APEF Foundation Guide for
Social Studies(1998) page 40
Journey On -  P.E.I. Department of Education, 2005
                in the Core Curriculum Areas

12Journey On -  P.E.I.  Department  of  Education,  2005
Technology Curriculum Outcomes
GENERAL  TECHNOLOGY  OUTCOMES
(as  per  APEF  Technology  Foundation  Document)
GTO A- Technology Problem Solving
Students  will  be  expected  to  design,  develop,  evaluate,  and  articulate  technological  solutions.
GTO B- Technology Systems
Students will be expected to operate and manage technological systems.
GTO C- History and Evolution of Technology
Students will be expected to demonstrate an understanding of the history and evolution of technol-
ogy and of its social and cultural implications.
GTO D- Technology and Careers
Students will be expected to demonstrate and understanding of current and evolving careers and of
the influence of technology on the nature of work.
GTO E- Technological Responsibility
Students will be expected to demonstrate an understanding of the consequences of their techno-
logical  choices.

13
Journey On -  P.E.I.  Department  of  Education,  2005
Areas
Computer Systems -  In  general,  a  complete,  working  computer.  The  computer  system  in-
cludes not only the computer, but also any software, networking, and peripheral devices that
are necessary to make the computer function.  Every computer system, for example, requires
an operating system such as Windows.
Social, Ethical and Health - General user guidelines for the responsible use of technology .
Internet - A global network connecting millions of computers.  This network carries various
information and services such as email, online chat, video, audio, web sites and other docu-
ments of the World Wide Web.
Concept Maps - Visual representations of relationships between ideas.  Methods for group-
ing and organizing information.  Visual learning allows new concepts to be more thoroughly
and  easily  understood.
Graphics - Refers to display and manipulation of images (text, pictures and drawings)
Spreadsheets - A table of values (text, numeric, dates) or information arranged in rows and
columns.      Spreadsheets  allow  the  computation  of data  with  formulas  and  the  creation  of
charts and graphs.
Word Processing - Using a computer to create, edit, and print documents. A word processor
enables  you  to  create  a  document,  store  it  electronically,  display  it  on  a  screen,  modify  it  by
entering commands and characters from the keyboard, and print it.
Multimedia -The use of computers to create and present several different media such as text,
graphics, video, animation, and sound in an integrated way.
Database - A collection of data organized in such a way that a computer program can quickly
select desired pieces of information from a search request. You can think of a database as an
electronic  filing  system.
Telecommunications - Refers to all types of data transmission, from voice to video using a
variety  of  media  such  as  copper  cable,  fibre  optics,  satellites,  wireless  technology,  etc.
Web Authoring - The act of developing a web site.  Software is available that will generate
the required HTML coding for the layout of the particular Web page.
Each skill area of the outcome continuum is identified by grade level and progress as follows:
Awareness - the student is exposed to the technology as it is being used by others.
Guided - the student begins to use the technology with the help of others.
Independent - the student uses the technology without assistance.

Computer Systems
Awareness
Guided Instruction
Independent
Students will be expected to:
1234567891
0
11
12
A1.1
make use of  help features to independently find solutions to problems
B1.1
login, open 
and close a program, open, save and close a file with mouse
B1.2
demonstrate proper use of login numbers and names, set-up and change passwords, and beaware of implications of multiple logins 
B1.3
begin to work with more than one file open at once (multi-task)
B1.4
differentiate between “Save” and “Save  as...”
B1.5
be able to identify the 
common  windows components of a given software screen (eg. menu bar,
button bar, cursor, insertion point)
B1.6
have an understanding of file management (drives and folders, rename, select, move, copy,
paste, delete, display format, backup, etc.)
B1.7
understand 
how to display file properties
B1.8
understand the difference between software and hardware
B1.9
identify 
system specifications and  be aware of compatibility issues between the hardware and
the software (processor speed and type, RAM, hard drive size, optical drive, connection types,video card, sound card, monitor, network cards)
B1.10
understand how and when to re-boot (warm boot vs cold boot)
B1.11
describe networks, file servers, connections (wireless, line types and speeds)
B1.12
demonstrate proper use of network printing, choose proper printer,  recognizes process and
purpose of Print Queues
B1.13
identify computer viruses, how they are transmitted and how anti-virus software is used to
protect or clean a computer
B1.14
identify SPAM, pop-up ads, spyware and other invasive software coding
B1.15
modify and utilize master pages/templates
B1.16
import and 
export files to other formats (.html, .pdf)
C1.1
identify technologies that are found in everyday life
Journey On - P.E.I. Department of Education, 2005
14

Social, Ethical, and Health
Awareness
Guided Instruction
Independent
Students will be expected to:
12 34567891
0
11
12
A2.1
identify aspects of an ergonomic workstation (lighting, monitor angle, work placement, keyboard
height, seat height, posture, etc.)
B2.1
demonstrate proper touch keyboarding techniques (ie: home row, quick key strokes, proper reaches)
C2.1
examine current Canadian law governing the use of technology
D2.1
determine the technological requirements for specific career goals
E2.1
respect equipment and other student’s work
E2.2
work co-operatively at work station
E2.3
adhere 
to acceptable use agreement for work station/network/Internet
E2.4
use electronic communication etiquette
E2.5
adhere 
to rules of freeware, shareware and commercial ware
E2.6
adhere to copyright and privacy laws, give credit to sources of information (MLA, APA)
E2.7
identify ethical issues involved with Internet content, awareness of inappropriate use of technology
E2.8
demonstrate caution before sending personal information over the internet
E2.9
follow publishing etiquette (suitable language, no discrimination,  etc.).  Adhere to the guidelines for
school web pages as outlined by PEI Department of Education.
Journey On - P.E.I. Department of Education, 2005
15

Internet
Awareness
Guided Instruction
Independent
Students will be expected to:
12 34567891
0
11
12
A3.1
demonstrate 
awareness of the Internet as a source of information
A3.2
use 
various tools (search engines and directories) and strategies necessary to carry out research
A3.3
obtain/download material (text, graphics, files) from Internet
B3.1
Use the various 
browser navigation tools (back, forward, history)
B3.2
manage bookmarks/favorites
B3.3
distinguish among various file formats (file extensions), required plugins, file
compression/decompression utilities
C3.1
discuss ways in which the Internet is evolving
E3.1
critically evaluate information and its source based on pre-determined criteria
Journey On - P.E.I. Department of Education, 2005
16

Concept Maps
Awareness
Guided Instruction
Independent
Students will be expected to:
1234567891
0
11
12
A4.1
use 
brainstorming techniques to generate ideas
A4.2
create a web
(i.e.: literary, concept, character, word, Venn Diagrams, and timelines)
A4.3
categorize ideas graphically
A4.4
create 
links between ideas, re-link or  delete links between  ideas
A4.5
elaborate on  
ideas (i.e. adding notes, annotations, etc.)
B4.1
add 
fonts, graphics, sound, and colours to enhance ideas
B4.2
create hyperlinks to files, web sites, or multimedia content
Journey On - P.E.I. Department of Education, 2005
17

Graphics
Awareness
Guided Instruction
Independent
Students will be expected to:
1234567891
0
11
12
A5.1
create illustrations or 
graphics by using the various drawing tools
A5.2
apply principles of design
B5.1
demonstrate various object  editing features (ie. select, unselect, resize, crop, area fill, add colour
and pattern, size adjustment using the mouse or scale, various erasing techniques, objectorientation, changing font and text size, colour or appearance, creating text blocks, change textwrap selection and other text manipulation functions)
B5.2
carry out various object manipulations (ie. object alignment, creation of  graphics in layers,
grouping/un-grouping components of an image)
B5.3
use other graphic creation tools (i.e. clone brush, colour replacements, effects and filters,
hexidecimal (RGB and CMYK colour values) 
B5.4
convert various graphic formats between vector ( ie: .png, .psp, .cdr) and bitmap images (ie: .wmf,
.tif, .bmp, .gif, jpeg, .jpg),  import a graphic file from another source
Journey On - P.E.I. Department of Education, 2005
18

Spreadsheets
Awareness
Guided Instruction
Independent
Students will be expected to:
1234567891
0
11
12
A6.1
plan / 
design a  spreadsheet to organize and tabulate data from various sources (to make a
schedule, tally/score sheet, solve a mathematical word problem)
A6.2
correct errors, modify or delete data in a cell
A6.3
design own formulas incorporating functions {if SUM(B1..D1)>0, @SUM(B1..D1), 0} and absolute /
relative cell references
A6.4
use different types of  graphs / charts  (line, pie, bar) to visually represent data; label graph
components (legend, title, x-y axis, colour, fill pattern)
B6.1
identify 
spreadsheet components and terminology (rows and columns, cell addresses, data entry
bar)
B6.2
identify different types of cell data (text, numeric, function, date)
B6.3
enter data into simple preexisting spreadsheets, auto 
fill data, data entry bar, sort data
B6.4
edit spreadsheet 
layout (insert and delete rows or columns, select a range of cells, alter column
widths and row heights, locking row and column headings, lock and unlock cell(s), fixed titles )
B6.5
enter formulas to perform calculations across columns, rows, cells, move/copy data or formulas 
from one area of spreadsheet to another
B6.6
format numbers (decimal places, currency, etc.), format text (font, colour, size)
B6.7
create 
links [between notebooks (tabs or sheets), external files, graphs, charts, website]
Journey On - P.E.I. Department of Education, 2005
19

Word Processing
Awareness
Guided Instruction
Independent
Students will be expected to:
123456 7891
0
11
12
A7.1
create and edit data files and form documents to perform a merge
A7.2
identify examples of 
 desktop publishing (i.e. newspaper, catalogue, ads, brochure)
B7.1
use a 
grade level appropriate wordprocessor to create and edit written work
B7.2
locate 
characters on a keyboard and identify functions of word processing (ie. cursor, insertion
point, enter key, space bar, upper case, backspace, shortcut key)
B7.3
use editing tools to 
revise work (i.e. spell check, thesaurus, find and replace) 
B7.4
change font, size, colour, style (ie. bold, italics, underline, insert special characters, drop capitals)
B7.5
format text (ie. justification, line spacing, outlines and bullets, text wrap)
B7.6
format documents (ie. using margins, tab 
rulers, indents, page center, border, watermark)
B7.7
insert a graphic and manipulate, (ie. resize, add borders and fill, create text art)
B7.8
insert and format tables and text boxes (ie. lines, fill, columns, rows, borders, alignment)
B7.9
format multi-page 
documents with headers, footers, page numbers, page breaks and keep text
together function, change page orientation/size   (ie. text presentation features)
B7.10
insert automated features (ie. date and file stamp)
Journey On - P.E.I. Department of Education, 2005
20

Multimedia
Awareness
Gui