tructures come from 
diverse communities, times, and places. Ask the students to describe 
buildings in their town/city/province. Have them talk about what 
they look like and what materials were used. Invite students to 
discuss who built them, for what purpose, and when they were built. 
Then have students create an image that refl ects their discussion 
about the buildings in their community.
•     Invite students to view, identify, and discuss decorations or patterns 
on crafts or old artefacts. Have them demonstrate an awareness 
of how these art forms represent artistic traditions from diverse 
communities, times, and places. Ask them to create an art form such 
as pottery, weaving, rug hooking, or mosaics using these decorations 
or patterns.
•     Challenge students to explore contemporary (such as David 
Gilhooly, Joe Fafard or Sweet and Sour Gargoyles by Island artists, 
Leslie Kwiatkowski, Candy Gallant, and Josh Dyment) and ancient 
(such as Greek African, Etruscan, Aboriginal, or Honoré Daumier) 
clay sculptures. Have them create a sculpture that has been inspired 
by one of these are pieces.
•     Have students look at paintings of families or different events 
from going on in the pictures and where they take place. Have the 
students discuss who they think the families are and where they live. 
Ask them to give reason for their thoughts and ideas. Were there any 
visual cues used in the pictures? If so, what?
Teacher prompts:
•     “How does the artist show that people in the past played games, had 
families, and made things that had personal meaning to them?”
•     “What kinds of art have you made to remember a special time, 
person, or place?”
•     “How can you use objects and images created by artists to inspire 
your own art making?”
•     “Do you tell stories and share ideas and feeling in your art making 
like artists do?”

95
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
Tasks for Instruction and/or Assessment
Resources/Notes
Demonstrate an understanding of a variety of art forms, styles, and techniques from the past and
present, and their social and/or community contexts.
STRAND FOUR: EXPLORING FORMS AND CULTURAL CONTEXTS
Presentation
•     Look at a painting about sports or games. What do these art works tell 
us about people? Why do you think a picture like this is important to 
an artist or audience? Create a painting of a sport or a game that you 
think is important. Present your painting to the class and talk about it.
Performance
•     Create a card such as a greeting card or collector card to celebrate a 
special time.
•     Look at hats and the clothes that are used for special events. Create a 
hat and clothes for a special event.
Journal
•     Buildings are an art form that represent and display artistic traditions of 
a time, place, and people. They are created with a certain look (design) 
and choice of materials. Find a building in your community that you 
think represents an artistic tradition of time, place, and people. Create 
a collage of this building. Write a piece in your art journal about this 
building. Make sure to write about how old it is, how it looks, what 
it is made of, who had it built, and how it was used. Then talk to a 
classmate about your collage.
Paper and Pencil
•     Look at portraits by Robert Harris. Who are the people in the portrait? 
What are they doing? Why do you think he created this picture? Create 
a portrait of a family member or someone in your community. Write a 
story about the person that you chose.
Authorized Resources
Explorations In Art 1 by Marilyn 
G. Stewart and Eldon Katter 
(Davis Publications, 2008)
Explorations in Art 1 Fine Arts 
and Studio Process CD ROM by 
Marilyn G. Stewart and Eldon 
Katter (Davis Publications, 2008)
pp. 9, 19, 25, 28-29, 39, 47, 58-
59, 77, 85, 88-89, 107, 118-119, 
124-125, 137, 148-149, 159, 162-
165, 167, 175, 178-179
Supplemental Resources
Adventures in Art 1 Teachers 
Wrap-Around Edition, Student 
Text, Transparencies
Art to the Schools Collection 
Confederation Centre Art Gallery
Eptek
Provincial and Community 
Museums
http://www.nationhood.ca

96
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1

97
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE  1
Appendix
Creative Development in the 
Kindergarten Integrated Curriculum

98
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1

99
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
APPENDIX: CREATIVE DEVELOPMENT
Creative Development
Creative Development is an essential part of a child’s development. 
In addition to pleasure and satisfaction, creative development 
is a way for children to respond to and interpret their real and 
imagined world; a vehicle through which children may express 
curiosity, feelings, and understandings; and a context in which 
children may discover and appreciate aspects of their cultural 
heritage and that of others.
Through movement, drama, music, art, and play, we share with 
one another our creativity and individuality. As young children 
explore and experience the world around them, they learn to 
respond thoughtfully and sensitively to their environment. They 
develop personal creativity through which they enrich, deepen, and 
extend their thinking, language, learning, and communication.
In the Prince Edward Island Kindergarten Integrated Curriculum, 
creative development is more than a subject area, it is an important 
tool that children can use across the curriculum. Providing children 
with opportunities to express themselves creatively supports their 
growing understanding in all areas of learning. Activities should 
be integrated not only to support learning expectations in other 
areas, but also to accept and support the diverse learning styles, 
interests, uniqueness, an abilities of individual children. Exposure 
to and involvement in a variety of creative activities will provide 
young children with the foundation for lifelong interest in, and an 
appreciation of, the arts.

100
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
Outcomes
Elaborations-Strategies for Learning and Teaching
Creative Development in the Kindergarten Integrated Curriculum
By the end of kindergarten, children will
APPENDIX: CREATIVE DEVELOPMENT
1.1  express ideas and feelings 
 creatively through music and
       movement
1.1  Music in a kindergarten program promotes appreciation and 
enjoyment of music in all its forms.
Music activities for kindergarten children may include
•     opportunities throughout the daily program for singing.
•     opportunities for children to listen to a variety of music (classical, 
traditional, instrumental, cultural, modern, local artists, etc.) to 
encourage awareness and appreciation of music.
•     responding to music through a variety of mediums:
-   painting
-   dancing/moving - children could use wind kites, streamers, 
    scarves, ribbons, etc. Children could also be encouraged to move
    fast, slow, like an animal, etc.
-   musical instruments -  bought (rhythm sticks, triangle, etc.) or
    made (shakers, drums, etc.)
Invite family members or others who can play musical instruments to 
share their music that refl ects different cultures.

101
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
Tasks for Instruction and/or Assessment
Resources/Notes
Creative Development in the Kindergarten Integrated Curriculum
APPENDIX: CREATIVE DEVELOPMENT
1.1  Observe and note
•     children’s involvement when participating in music and movement 
activities
•     can they hear the beat or rhythm in music and clap/snap/tap to the 
music?
•     children expressing themselves creatively in play.
Take pictures of children dancing, moving, playing in dramatic play, acting 
out stories, doing puppet plays, etc. for their portfolio.
Joyful Learning in Kindergarten, 
p. 107
Warm Up to Big Books

102
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
Outcomes
Elaborations-Strategies for Learning and Teaching
Creative Development in the Kindergarten Integrated Curriculum
By the end of kindergarten, children will
APPENDIX: CREATIVE DEVELOPMENT
1.2  express ideas and feelings 
 creatively through artistic
       expression
1.2  Art is the process of visual expression and creation. It can result in 
a drawing, a painting, a print, or three-dimensional products, such as 
sculptures and collages. It is important that children be allowed freedom 
to express themselves through art everyday. The following are some 
suggestions.
Provide opportunities for children to explore freely in a well-stocked art 
centre including recycled and natural material.
•     tools - variety of paint brushes, sponges, scissors, markers, crayons, 
stamps, stencils, etc.
•     materials - paper of different sizes, textures, and colours, magazines, 
catalogues, natural and recycled materials, etc.
•     processes - fi nger painting, tearing, crumpling, glueing, cutting, 
mixing, etc.
Have children respond to literature through paintings, play dough 
creations, drawings, preparing props for role-playing, etc.
Allow children the opportunity to explore and discuss different elements 
of design - colour, line, shape, texture and form, e.g., child talk: “I used a 
wiggly line.” “I made a rubbing of my leaf.” “I cut a zigzag line.” “I made 
different shapes with play dough.” “I glued seeds to my picture to make 
it bumpy.” “I used leaves, twigs, and torn paper to make my picture.” 
“We used blocks and boxes to make a sculpture like the one in the book.” 
“I made a print with my sponge.”
Talk about and point out techniques used by an illustrator in a picture 
book (e.g., photographs, plasticine art, drawings, paintings, black and 
white pictures, collage, etc.).
Invite local artists or visit an art gallery to expose children to a variety of 
art work.
Provide opportunities for children to represent their creations, e.g., 
draw their block creation as a record to do the same block structure the 
next day (SS3.1), self portraits (SS1.1). See also Investigations: Counting 
Ourselves and Others - Choice Time, p. 25. Reproduce pattern block 
creations with paper patterns.
Display children’s creations.

103
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
Tasks for Instruction and/or Assessment
Resources/Notes
Creative Development in the Kindergarten Integrated Curriculum
APPENDIX: CREATIVE DEVELOPMENT
1.2  Observe and note children’s engagement in the art process. Do they visit 
the art centre? Do they talk about and share with others their creations?
•     Do the children use their own ideas when creating? Do they follow the 
lead of a friend?
•     Do they use old materials in a new way?
•     Do they explore with different materials?
As it is diffi cult to add children’s 3-D creations (plasticine, blocks, box 
creations, etc.) to their portfolios, take pictures to add to it.
Joyful Learning in Kindergarten, 
p. 107
Warm Up to Big Books

104
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
Outcomes
Elaborations-Strategies for Learning and Teaching
Creative Development in the Kindergarten Integrated Curriculum
By the end of kindergarten, children will
APPENDIX: CREATIVE DEVELOPMENT
1.3  represent and express ideas and 
 feelings creatively through play
1.3  While some children may engage in art or music activities, others 
will express themselves creatively through a variety of play activities. 
These include, but are not limited to, dramatic play, sand/water, blocks, 
puppets, and acting out stories.
The development of self-concept and self-esteem plays an important 
role in learning to recognize and accept others and their differences. 
Educators can support this by adding props and accessories that represent 
ethnic, gender, social, and cultural diversity to various learning centres, 
e.g., blocks/boxes to build different kind of houses, dress-up clothes, food 
representing different cultures.
To foster children’s creativity, educators regularly change materials in 
learning centres. For example, snow/ice can be added to the water table, a 
variety of boxes can be added to the block centre, props can be added to 
the reading centre, etc.

105
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
Tasks for Instruction and/or Assessment
Resources/Notes
Creative Development in the Kindergarten Integrated Curriculum
APPENDIX: CREATIVE DEVELOPMENT
1.3  Observe and note children expressing themselves creatively in play.
Observe and note how children use materials and resources creatively in 
play.
Take pictures of children playing in dramatic play, acting out stories or 
doing puppet plays for their portfolio.
Joyful Learning in Kindergarten

106
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1

107
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE  1
Glossary

108
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1

109
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
GLOSSARY
art portfolio—A folder that each students is expected to keep fi nished and selected studies of images. It is a tool 
for refl ection and demonstrating ideas, skills, and growth.
blending—The blending of colours, tints, and shades to create a three-dimensional effect in an image.
crayon/pastel resist—A technique where crayon or pastel is used to draw on a surface and then paint is applied 
and is resisted in the area that has the crayon or pastel.
depth—The distance from top to bottom or from back to front. 
folk artist—A self-taught artist who is inspired by his/her surroundings. A person who has not been taught the 
fi ne art traditions.
glazing—A transparent (can be seen through) layer of paint applied over dry paint which allows the under 
painting to show through.
impasto—A thick application of paint to a panel or canvas in a painting.
india ink—A type of ink used by artists. Originally the ingredients were found in India, thus the name India Ink. 
style—the distinct artistic characteristics created by an artist, period of time and culture 
mixed media—Any art work in which more than one medium is used. 
paint resist—A technique where crayon or pastels is used to draw on a surface and then a paint or dye is applied 
and is resisted by the area that has the wax or the oil.
palette—A thin often oval board that a painter uses to hold and mix colours.
scratchboard—This is an art material that has a black coated board and when scratch the coloured layer below is 
revealed. 
scumbling—An opaque colour is applied over a dried fi rst layer, and then a brush or a sponge is used to remove 
some of the opaque colour to create a texture and let some of the bottom colour come through.
sgraffi to—A technique where the top layer of colour is scratched to reveal a colour beneath.
stamp prints—Prints that are created by applying ink/paint to tools/objects and pressing it on a surface such as 
paper or cloth.
story board—A sequence of images that convey a story.
Glossary

110
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
GLOSSARY