udent learning should focus on the extent to which 
students have achieved the curriculum outcomes. Reporting involves 
communicating the summary and interpretation of information 
about student learning to various audiences who require it. Teachers 
have the responsibility to explain accurately what progress students 
have made in their learning, and to respond to parent and student 
inquiries about learning.
Narrative reports on progress and achievement can provide 
information about student learning that letter and number grades 
alone cannot. Such reports might, for example, suggest ways in 
which students can improve their learning and identify ways in 
which teachers and parents can best provide support.
Eff ective communication with parents regarding their children’s 
progress is essential in fostering successful home-school partnerships. 
Th  e report card is one means of reporting individual student 
progress. Other means include the use of conferences, notes, phone 
calls, and electronic methods.
Evaluation

23
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
CURRICULUM FRAMEWORK
Curriculum Framework
Essential Graduation 
Learnings
In 1993, work began on the development of common curricula for 
public education in Atlantic Canada. Th  e Atlantic Ministers of
Education’s primary purposes for collaborating in curriculum 
development are to:
•     improve the quality of education for all students through shared 
expertise and resources;
•     ensure that the education students receive across the region is 
equitable;
•     meet the needs of students and society.
Essential Graduation Learnings are statements describing the 
kno
wledge, skills, and attitudes expected of all students who 
graduate from high school.
Achievement of the Essential Graduation Learnings will prepare 
students to continue to learn throughout their lives. Th  ese  
learnings describe expectations not in terms of individual school 
subjects but in terms of knowledge, skills, and attitudes developed 
throughout the curriculum. Th  ey  confi rm that students need to 
make connections and develop abilities across subject boundaries if 
they are to be ready to meet the shifting and ongoing demands of 
life, work, and study today and in the future. Essential Graduation 
Learnings are cross-curricular, and curriculum in all subject areas is 
focussed on enabling students to achieve these learnings. Essential 
Graduation Learnings serve as a framework for the curriculum 
development process.
Essential Graduation Learnings and curriculum outcomes provide 
a consistent vision for the development of a rigorous and relevant 
curriculum. Th  rough the achievement of curriculum outcomes, 
students demonstrate the Essential Graduation Learnings.
A Common Approach

24
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
CURRICULUM FRAMEWORK
Organizing Visual Arts 
Strands and General 
Curriculum Outcomes
In the Elementary Visual Arts Curricula, there are four organizing 
strands: Fundamental Concepts, Creating and Presenting; Refl ecting, 
Responding, and Analysing, and Exploring Form and Cultural Context. 
These four strands provide the framework for the eleven specifi c 
outcomes found in the Elementary Visual Arts Curricula. 
These eleven specifi c curriculum outcomes found in column one 
describe the knowledge and skills that students are expected to 
demonstrate by the end of each grade level.
At each grade level, the eleven specifi c curriculum outcomes 
are elaborated in more detail in column two and three. These 
elaborations clarify the requirements specifi ed in each of the eleven 
specifi c curriculum outcomes and demonstrate the depth and level of 
complexity of each of the specifi c curriculum outcomes.
The following strands and specifi c curriculum outcomes provide the 
blueprint for the design of the Grade One Elementary Visual Arts 
curriculum. They interconnect and support each other:
Th  is strand focuses on the students’ developing an understanding 
of the fundamental concepts through participation in a variety of 
hands-on, open-ended visual arts experiences. Th  ese  fundamental  
concepts represent essential aspects in visual arts. Th  ey are to be 
embedded in the other strands and specifi c curriculum outcomes. 
As students progress through the curriculum from grade to grade, 
they extend and deepen their understanding with increasing 
sophistication. Th  ey also continue to build on the skills related to 
these concepts that they have learned in earlier grades. 
It should be noted that students learn about these concepts through 
meaningful, creative activities. Teachers must also determine the 
extent to which the students have prior knowledge of the concepts 
in each strand and grade; they may need to provide diff erentiated 
instruction to ensure that students are given support, for example, 
in reviewing and applying concepts and skills introduced in 
previous grades. For this reason, teachers should be familiar with 
the curriculum expectations for at least the grades that immediately 
precede and follow the grade that they are teaching.
Students are expected to
•     develop and demonstrate an understanding of the elements and 
principles of art and design in creating and viewing artwork 
(FC1.1)
Strand One:
Fundamental Concepts 
(FC)
Specifi c Curriculum Outcome

25
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
CURRICULUM FRAMEWORK
Strand Three:
Refl ecting, Responding 
and Analysing (RRA)
Specifi c Curriculum Outcomes
Strand Two:
Creating and     
Presenting (CP)
Specifi c Curriculum Outcomes
This strand focuses on the students’ creative use of the various 
art forms to express and communicate feelings and ideas in those 
forms. Students are required to be actively engaged in the stages 
of the creative process. When engaged in stages of the creative 
process, students should be given opportunities to be inventive and 
imaginative in their thinking, rather than merely to fi nd a prescribed 
answer. Refl ection and feedback, both ongoing and summative, are 
essential parts of the creative process, allowing students to evaluate 
their own achievement and to grow in their creative endeavours.
Students are expected to
•     create two- and three-dimensional works of art that express 
feelings and ideas inspired by personal experiences (CP1.1)
•     demonstrate an understanding of composition, using principles 
of art and design to create narrative art works or art works on a 
theme or topic (CP1.2)
•     use elements of art and design in art works to communicate 
ideas, messages, and understandings (CP1.3)
•     use a variety of materials, tools, and techniques to respond to 
design challenges (CP1.4)
This strand focuses on the students’ awareness and communication 
of emotional and intellectual responses to works in the various 
art forms. Students are required to use the critical analysis process 
to analyse, discuss, and interprets their own and those of others, 
and to assess their strengths and areas of growth as both creators 
and audience members. Students learn that all ideas can be 
expanded upon and revised and can be considered from a variety 
of perspectives. Practice in using the critical analysis process is 
intended to help students move beyond quick judgements to develop 
informed personal points of view and to learn how to articulate their 
creative and artistic choices.
Students are expected to
•     express personal feelings and ideas about art experiences and 
images (RRA1.1)
•     explain how the elements and principles of art and design are 
used to communicate meaning or understanding in their own 
and others’ art work  (RRA1.2)
•     demonstrate an awareness of the meaning of signs and symbols 
encountered in their daily lives and in works of art (RRA1.3)
•     identify and explain their strengths, their interests, and areas for 
improvement as creators of art. (RRA1.4)

26
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
CURRICULUM FRAMEWORK
Strand Four:
Exploring Form and 
Cultural Context (EC)
This strand focuses on the students’ awareness and understanding 
of how art forms have developed in various times and places; the 
role of the different art forms in students’ own lives and in local, 
national, and global communities; and of the social and economic 
factors that infl uence how these art forms are perceived and valued. 
This component also encompasses the study of contemporary media 
and art forms. It is intended to help students understand that the 
arts are important means in recording and expressing cultural history 
and identity and are also an essential aspect of living for all people. 
The focus should not be on the learning of facts, but rather on a 
meaningful extension of creating and learning in the arts.
The four strands are closely interrelated, and the knowledge and 
skills describe the expectations in each group are interdependent 
and complementary. Teachers should plan activities that blend 
expectations from these four groups in order to provide students with 
the kinds of experiences that promote meaningful learning and that 
help them understand the interrelationships between creative and 
practical work, critical analysis, and learning about the sociocultural 
and historical context of the arts.
Students are expected to
•     identify and describe a variety of visual art forms they see in 
their home, at school, in the community, and in visual arts 
experiences (EC1.1)
•     demonstrate an awareness of a variety of art and artistic 
traditions from diverse communities, times, and places (EC1.2)
Specifi c Curriculum Outcomes

27
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
CURRICULUM FRAMEWORK
Column 1:
Specifi c Curriculum Outcomes
Column 2:
Elaborations-Strategies for 
Learning and Teaching
How to Use the Four-
Column Curriculum 
Spread
The curriculum has been organized into four columns to relate 
learning experiences to the outcomes by:
•     providing a range of strategies for learning and teaching 
associated with the specifi c curriculum outcome;
•     demonstrating the relationship between outcomes and 
assessment strategies;
•     referring to specifi c sections of the authorized resources;
•     suggesting ways that teachers can make cross-curricular 
connections;
•     providing teachers with ideas for supplementary resources.
Column 1 provides specifi 
c curriculum outcomes that describe the 
knowledge and skills the students are expected to demonstrate by
the end of the course. Th  ese outcomes are coded as follows:
StrandFC    (Fundamental Concepts)
CP    (Creating and Presenting)
RRA  (Refl ecting, Responding,
          and Analysing)
EC    (Exploration and Forms
          of Cultural Context)
These codes represent 
the various strands in 
each grade level for 
the elementary visual 
arts curriculum.
Grade1This code indicates 
the grade level of the 
elementary visual arts 
curriculum.
Numeral   E.g., .1This code indicates 
the specifi c 
curriculum outcome 
number.
Example    FC1.1
(Fundamental concept, Grade 
1, fi rst SCO)
This example 
represents a coded 
specifi c curriculum 
outcome.
The elaborations are intended to help clarify and communicate 
the depth and breadth of learning. This column offers elaborations 
describing what students are expected to know and be able to do in 
order to appreciate and value visual arts.
This column also offers a range of learning and teaching strategies for 
teachers. The learning and teaching strategies are indicated by bullets 
in this column. Teacher prompts are also included in column two.

28
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
CURRICULUM FRAMEWORK
Column 3:
Tasks for Instruction and/or 
Assessment
This column provides suggestions for ongoing assessment and 
evaluation that form an integral part of the learning experience. A 
variety of assessment strategies and techniques are provided to ensure 
that the student has the opportunity to demonstrate her/his learning 
in a variety of ways.
It is important to note that many of the learning processes and 
strategies in columns two and three are interchangeable: they are 
both learning processes and strategies for assessment of learning in, 
through, and about the visual arts.
This column indicates the authorized resources for teachers to use, as 
well as other resources, including specifi c cross-curricular and Web 
links. Teachers are encouraged to record their own notes in column 
four.
Teachers are encouraged to record their own notes in column four.
Column 4:
Resources and Notes
62
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
Outcomes
Elaborations-Strategies for Learning and Teaching
Develop an understanding of the following concepts through participation in a variety of hands-on, open-
ended visual arts experiences.
Students are expected to
STRAND ONE: FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
•     develop an understanding of the  
elements and principles of art  
and design in creating and      
viewing art work (FC1.1)
Throughout the school year, grade one students will explore, experiment, 
identify, and demonstrate a basic understanding of the elements and 
principles of art and design when creating and viewing art work. They 
will build upon, expand, and refi ne their knowledge of the elements 
and principles from the kindergarten  level. Students will be expected to 
identify, articulate, and use the elements and principles of art and design 
with the following level (degree) of understanding.
Elements of Art and Design:
Students will develop an understanding of all elements of art and design:
•     line: jagged, curved, broken, dashed, spiral, straight, wavy, zigzag 
lines; lines in art and everyday objects (natural and human-made)
•     shape and form: geometric and organic shapes and forms of familiar 
objects (e.g., geometric: circles, blocks; organic: clouds, fl owers)
•     space: depiction of objects in the distance as smaller and closer to 
the top of the art paper; shapes and lines closer together or far apart; 
horizon lines; spaces through, inside, and around shapes and objects
•     colour:     mixing of primary colours (red, yellow, blue); identifi cation 
of warm (e.g., red, orange, yellow) and cool (e.g., blue, green, purple)
•     texture: textures of familiar objects (e.g., fuzzy, prickly, bumpy, 
smooth); changes in texture; a pattern of lines to show texture (e.g., 
the texture of a snake’s skin); transfer of texture (e.g., placing a piece 
of paper over a textured surface and then rubbing the paper with wax 
crayon)
•     value: light, dark
Principles of Art and Design
Students will develop understanding of all principles of design (that 
is, contrast, repetition and rhythm, variety, emphasis, proportion, balance, 
unity and harmony, and movement), but the focus in grade one will be on 
contrast.
•     contrast: light/dark; large/small; pure/mixed colours; near/far
63
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
Tasks for Instruction and/or Assessment
Resources/Notes
Develop an understanding of the following concepts through participation in a variety of hands-on, open-
ended visual arts experiences.
STRAND ONE: FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
Performance
•     Use a variety of lines, such as jagged