rstanding is a key starting point to 
valuing the diversity within our own Canadian culture.
Valuing is intensely personal and involves making connections with 
individual and social standards and beliefs. It includes respect for and 
recognition of the worth of what is valued. It recognizes the reality 
of more than one perspective, more than one way of being and 
perceiving in the world, and the richness of found answers.
The Grade One Elementary Visual Arts curriculum promotes self 
understanding, as well as an appreciation of the world’s social and 
cultural contexts. 
Students are encouraged to recognize the power of creativity in 
constructing, defi ning, and shaping knowledge; in developing 
attitudes and skills; and in extending these new learnings in social 
and cultural contexts. Visual arts require skills, knowledge, and 
values. As students explore and refl ect on visual arts, they arrive at 
a deeper understanding of how visuals shape their lives and have an 
impact on each person.
Since works of art are unmistakably part of personal identity, and 
defi ning features of culture, it is critical that the Grade One 
Elementary Visual Arts curriculum respects, affi rms, understands, 
and appreciates individual and cultural/racial uniqueness in all 
aspects of teaching and learning.
Almost one million Canadians earn a living in the cultural sector.
This curriculum acknowledges the importance of visual arts in 
adult life and introduces learners to various career pathways and 
entrepreneurial opportunities in this vibrant sector.
The grade level-specifi c curriculum outcomes provide reference 
points for teachers to inform their instructional practice as they 
monitor students’ progress. Assessment involves more than judgment 
made about a performance or presentation after learning has taken 
place. It is recognized that students have responsibility for their own 
learning. As a continuous, collaborative, comprehensive process, 
assessment can be a powerful tool to enhance students’ learning 
when self-assessment is an integral part of that learning.

5
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
5
CONTEXTS FOR LEARNING AND TEACHING
Contexts for Learning and Teaching
The Elementary Years
The primary grades (K-grade 3) are the foundational years during 
which the basic curriculum concepts, values, and skills are developed.
Children are introduced to formal education that provides a 
necessary complement to the child’s experiences at home and in the 
community. The primary years, the critical years for learning, may 
be key to success in all other years. It is during these years that there 
is a shared responsibility for literacy and numeracy skills to support 
learning across the curriculum. Teaching strategies must be varied 
and always aimed at meeting individual needs and bringing children 
to the highest level of achievement possible.
To create a seamless, integrated approach to learning during these 
years, it is necessary to incorporate concepts, values, and skills across 
all subject areas. A child’s approach to learning is a very hands-on, 
minds-on approach; therefore, experiences that provide for this are 
critical to achievement. The primary child is very interested in the 
immediate environment; therefore, the school environment must be 
stimulating and appropriately challenging.
Each child is unique. Within any group of children, diff erences 
in rates and ways of learning, in experiences, and in interests, are 
expected and respected. Individual diff erences are celebrated and 
built upon. A variable for the individual is to achieve personal 
best as he/she works towards excellence. Improving performance 
and realizing potential are more important than competition and 
comparisons to others.
Children have many ways of understanding the world. A basic need 
for all learners is to make sense of their experiences. A vision of the 
child as an active learner, building a personal knowledge of the world 
through interactions with people, materials, and ideas, should guide 
all educational planning.
Understanding the nature of the primary learner is essential in 
providing a balanced education. Education should enhance the 
development of the whole child. Th  e development of children 
in this age group is discussed in the context of the following fi ve 
dimensions.
The Elementary 
Learner

6
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
6
CONTEXTS FOR LEARNING AND TEACHING
Aesthetic
Emotional
Intellectual Development
Each child has an aesthetic dimension. Children are exposed to 
artistic dimension. Children are exposed to artistic processes and 
products in a variety of genres and cultures. They are provided 
opportunities to create, perceive, and communicate through the 
arts. Critical and analytical thinking and problem-solving skills 
are developed and applied in practical learning experiments. An 
appreciation for and experience in those things that constitute the 
arts add to children’s understanding of the world, their culture, and 
their community. Children with an aesthetic sensibility value culture, 
environment, and personal surroundings.
Each child has an emotional dimension. Children learn best in a 
safe, supportive environment. Positive feelings towards self, others, 
and learning are continuously promoted by the school. As children 
move from kindergarten through grade 6, they are encouraged to 
become independent and more responsible for their own learning. 
There is relationship between success and self-esteem. Learning 
is structured so that every child experiences success. Children are 
encouraged to become more refl ective and introspective. They are 
given opportunities to consider ideas that are of both general and 
personal signifi cance. 
Each child has an intellectual dimension. Intellectual development is 
the process of deriving meaning from experience through acquiring 
and constructing knowledge. The ultimate goal is that children 
develop strategies that will help them solve complex problems. They 
learn to reason and communicate effectively, and take responsibility 
for their own learning. They ask questions and question the answers. 
They develop an understanding of how human beings know and 
comprehend. They become thoughtful and refl ective learners.
Primary children generally function at a concrete level intellectually, 
and the general progression from concrete experiences to semi-
concrete to abstract is the most effective way of meeting the learning 
needs of young children. Primary children are usually very literal 
in their interpretations, and adults working with them must be 
aware of this characteristic. Sensitive inclusion of those with unique 
intellectual challenges is modelled and promoted.
Each child has a physical dimension. Physical well-being is 
essential to living and learning. Opportunities for movement and 
the development of a variety of motor skills are provided, and 
development of respect for the body and the desire to care for it 
are promoted. The curriculum fosters knowledge of and positive 
attitudes towards nutrition, physical fi tness, and safety. Sensitive 
inclusion of those with unique physical challenges is modeled and 
promoted.
Physical

7
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
7
CONTEXTS FOR LEARNING AND TEACHING
Social
The special role of physical activity as leisure is considered. 
Leadership, good sportspersonship, and consideration for others are 
encouraged. Children learn that physical activity as a special form of 
human endeavour can lead to high levels of performance. They also 
learn that enjoying physical activity and benefi ting from it in terms 
of enhanced health and well-being are equally important.
Each child has a social dimension. Learning to interact cooperatively 
with other people is an essential life skill that can be taught and 
practised in schools. The classroom is a community of learners. 
Taking turns, sharing materials, collaborating to solve problems, and 
working in co-operative groups for a variety of real purposes provide 
opportunities for children to learn social skills essential to living in 
any community.
To enhance students’ ability to appreciate diversity, instructional 
practices need to:
•     foster a learning community which is free from bias and unfair 
practices;
•     promote opportunities to develop positive self-images that 
enable students to transcend stereotypes and develop as 
individuals;
•     promote communication and understanding among those who 
differ in attitude, knowledge, points of view, and dialect, as well 
as among those who are similar;
•     encourage and enable students to question their own 
assumptions, and to imagine, understand, and appreciate 
realities other than their own;
•     promote the equitable sharing of resources, including teachers’ 
attention and support;
•     encourage students to examine and critique materials and 
experiences for bias and prejudice;
•     examine historical and current equity and bias issues;
•     promote opportunities in non-traditional careers and 
occupations;
•     encourage students to challenge prejudice and discrimination
Visual arts education promotes a commitment to equity by valuing, 
appreciating, and accepting the diverse multicultural and multiracial 
nature of society, as well by fostering awareness and critical analysis 
of individual and systematic discrimination. Visual arts education 
encourages students to question their own assumptions, and to 
imagine, understand, and appreciate realities other than their own.

8
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
8
CONTEXTS FOR LEARNING AND TEACHING
Principles Underlying 
Visual Arts Education
•     Visual arts education is a fundamental component of a balanced 
educational program for all students.
•     Visual arts education serves the educational goals of society 
by fostering growth of creativity, production of culture, and 
advancement of knowledge and understanding of the world 
and ourselves. Visual arts education takes into consideration 
and refl ects values and concerns of society, such as human 
rights, democratic principles, cultural identity, cultural integrity, 
peaceful co-existence, preservation of the environment, and the 
well-being of all individuals.
•     Visual arts education, as an integral part of general education, is 
the responsibility of society, and involves community to achieve 
goals.
•     Visual arts education programs strive for excellence, equity, and 
relevance. The achievement of these goals is the responsibility of 
all partners in education.
•     Visual arts education programs build upon what research tells 
us about successful practice and the developmental nature of 
students.
The continuum of learning in the arts, which has been developed 
for kindergarten through grade 12, encourages and validates student 
progress and achievement, and takes into account the following 
factors:
•     the nature of the individual discipline (which would be visual 
arts for these curricula)
•     the age and developmental stage of the learners
•     the range of opportunities for learning
•     student interest and enthusiasm
•     learning     styles
•     multiple     intelligences
•     teacher     expertise
•     learning     time
•     resource     availability
The learning continuum in visual arts must take into account the 
premise of a broad arts offering at the early, middle, and high school 
levels.
Critical and contextual understandings are deepened so that students 
are able to form their own judgments and support them, using 
correct terminology and range of evaluative criteria.
The learning continuum must be supported with suffi cient time and 
resources to ensure that students experience a broad range of visual 
experiences that are sequential, comprehensive, planned,      
coordinated, and related to the outcomes of this document.
The Learning    
Continuum

9
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
9
CONTEXTS FOR LEARNING AND TEACHING
The Learning    
Environment
The learning environment should be stimulating and rich in 
opportunities in order to develop the full capacities of a 21st century 
learner. Within this environment, the teacher provides learning 
experiences that bring together the intentions of the curriculum 
outcomes, the needs and the experiences of the learner, and the 
resources of the learner’s community.
Learning environments should be structured to support individual 
learners and be dynamic and fl exible to meet the breadth of teaching 
and learning needs. A stimulating visual environment draws 
upon the learner’s aesthetic thoughts, feelings, emotions, beliefs, 
perceptions, and abilities to create, explore, and develop ideas. It 
values opportunities to discuss, express, and share those ideas.
A stimulating learning environment is an ideal space to unleash a 
student’s creative potential. An environment that provides interesting 
and challenging places for sense, mind, and body to rest and refl ect, 
and which presents many different pieces of information, is one that 
stimulates creative thinking. Some suggested supports for stimulating 
surroundings and learning environments include the following: 
•     original art works; photos/digital artifacts/computer generated 
images; 
•     pictures of different visual artists from various times and places; 
•     a place for dramatizing images and presenting dramas; 
•     a sound station for those who use music or sound in their art 
work; 
•     an exhibition/display space for students’ works (adjustable 
lighting is important); 
•     an area in which to research and develop projects; various work 
stations for different media, with good lighting; 
•     a space that has access to the outdoors, so that larger pieces such 
as sculptures can be safely created; an area that has access to 
industrial technology machinery and fabric equipment; 
•     a place for viewing DVDs and digital images; 
•     a space in which to research different artists and art works.; and 
•     a private space for student reviews, interviews and portfolios.
Visual arts education provides students with a diverse range of 
experiences in or
der to address individual diff erences and provide 
a foundation for lifelong learning. In order to achieve these goals, 
access to many diff erent learning resources is necessary. Th  ese  include  
print materials, aural and visual stimulation materials, and other 
materials relevant to Grade One Elementary Visual Arts curriculum. 
Th  ese resources are found within the school, as well as within the 
larger community.
Resource-Based  
Learning

10
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
10
CONTEXTS FOR LEARNING AND TEACHING
Project Based Learning
Learning resources for the visual arts courses have been considered 
for content, format, methodology, evaluation, assessment, and 
treatment of social issues. Equally important considerations have 
been given to the wide range of audiences (e.g., age, fi rst language, 
special needs), as well as the purpose, characteristics, and use of 
the various media selections. Every effort has been made to ensure 
that the resources have been selected for their strengths rather than 
rejected for their weakn