esses. The visual arts support texts have been 
chosen on the basis that they are pertinent and up-to-date, but in 
some cases some texts have been chosen to support specifi c outcomes 
that focus on traditional art forms and their methodology.
Members of the visual arts community can provide a valuable human 
resource for the Grade One Elementary Visual Arts curriculum. 
Opportunities, such as visiting-artists programs, visual presentations, 
and participatory workshops, held in the school and in the 
community, also heighten the awareness of the important role visual 
arts plays in community life. It is important that participating artists 
be valued and recognized as professionals.
Project Based Learning (PBL) is a teaching and learning 
methodology in which students engage in a rigorous, extended 
process of inquiry focused on complex, authentic questions and 
problems as they achieve the knowledge, skills, and attitudes defi ned 
by the curriculum outcomes.  A set of learning experiences and 
tasks guide students in inquiry toward answering a central question, 
solving a problem or meeting a challenge, as opposed to several 
activities tied together under a theme, concept, time period, culture, 
or geographic area (e.g. the Renaissance, the ocean, WWII, Canada). 
Throughout the project, students work as independently from the 
teacher as possible, and have some degree of “voice and choice”.
PBL is unlike traditional projects in the sense that it is informed by 
the curriculum and drives the instruction and learning, as opposed 
to involving students in a “fun activity” or “making something”.  It 
is often focused on creating physical artifacts but must involve other 
intellectually challenging tasks and products focused on research, 
reading, writing, discussion, investigation, and oral presentation.  
Through PBL, students can develop and demonstrate in-depth 
understanding of academic knowledge and skills while enhancing 
habits of mind, along with collaboration, critical thinking, and 
communication skills.  PBLs can be interdisciplinary in nature and 
allow for curriculum integration from different subject areas within 
one project.  This learning experience ends with a high-quality 
product or performance created by the student(s) and presented to a 
public audience.  
Two important components of PBL are the creation of a driving 
question and the collaboration with a Subject Matter Expert (SME).

11
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
11
CONTEXTS FOR LEARNING AND TEACHING
The Driving Question
A well-crafted driving question is essential to all effective PBLs.  It 
is this question that will form the basis of explicit links with the 
curriculum, create the focus of the project for the students, and 
encourage their process of inquiry and investigation.  All driving 
questions should be provocative, challenging, open-ended, and 
complex and must be linked to the core of what students are to learn 
as determined by the provincially authorized curriculum. Sample 
driving questions might include:
•     Who are the heroes of our community?
•     When is war justifi ed?
•     What effect does population growth have on our society?
•     Is watching TV benefi cial or harmful to teenagers?
•     How can we create a piece of media to demonstrate diversity in 
our  school?
Students may work in collaborative teams or individually to 
investigate, research, and refi ne knowledge and skills to adequately 
answer the driving question.  Because the driving question is open-
ended, students are able to reach a variety of potential conclusions 
in countless ways, while still building in-depth knowledge and 
skills.  This creates the independent nature of the project and also 
the feeling of “voice and choice” for the students.  The teacher then 
assumes more of a facilitator/coach role, assisting and guiding during 
an investigation and providing direct instruction when necessary.
Subject Matter Expert (SME)
A well crafted PBL also includes the role of a Subject Matter Expert, 
or SME.  These individuals/groups play a key role in PBL as they 
bring fi rst-hand authentic knowledge and experience from the 
specifi c content fi eld to the classroom.  They may be sought out 
by the student(s) during their investigation or prearranged by the 
teacher depending on the project.  These experts provide additional 
support and information to the students related to the topics and 
help demonstrate to the students that the work they are completing 
is authentic and “real-world”.  The involvement of these experts 
allows educators to expand the classroom walls and make strong 
connections and links with surrounding communities.
At the conclusion of the PBL, students are required to present their 
fi ndings to a public audience.  Their peers in the classroom may 
act as the dress rehearsal for this presentation and provide valuable 
feedback to refi ne the presentation.  However, in order to “raise the 
stakes” for the students’ fi nal presentation,  students should present 
their fi ndings to members of the community, experts in the fi eld 
(including the involved SME), parents, or school administration in 
addition to presenting to their classroom peers.
Adapted with permission from PBL Starter Kit, (2009) The Buck 
Institute for Education.  (www.bie.org) 

12
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
12
CONTEXTS FOR LEARNING AND TEACHING
In an arts curriculum, Project Based Learning allows learners to move 
through a meaningful question to explore, investigate, and engage 
in real-world situations, issues, and views that challenge them to 
refl ect, collaborate, plan, design, create and present two-and three-
dimensional works of art.
Before students can accomplish anything in a visual context they will 
need to inquire into a topic, process, and material while developing 
their own thoughts, feelings, and understandings to convey meaning 
for a variety of audiences.
These open-ended art experiences should include opportunities to:
•     explore and investigate ideas through experimentation with   
new materials, techniques, and elements and principles of   
art and design;
•     collaborate with others in the art-making process;
•     draw upon ideas, perceptions, and responses as the source   
for creative works;
•     present art works to an audience with sensitivity to the   
intention of the artist and the ways in which the work can   
be interpreted;
•     articulate expressive responses to art works with an
awareness of artistic style and aesthetic qualities of the    
works;
•     evaluate and make informed judgements about their own   
art work and the works of others;
•     share their learnings with other people in such forms as   
presentations, exhibitions, displays, journals, blogs, and   
virtual galleries.
Project Based Learning 
for Visual Arts

13
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
13
CONTEXTS FOR LEARNING AND TEACHING
Equity and Diversity
The society of Prince Edward Island, like all of Canada, refl ects 
diversity in race, ethnicity, gender, ability, values, lifestyle, and 
languages. Schools should foster the understanding of such diversity. 
The Prince Edward Island Elementary Visual Arts curriculum is 
designed to meet the needs and interests, and refl ect the values and 
experiences of all students. 
In a learning community characterized by mutual trust, acceptance, 
and respect, student diversity is both recognized and valued. All 
students are entitled to have their personal experiences and their 
racial and ethnocultural heritage valued within an environment 
that upholds the rights of each student and requires students to 
respect the rights of others. Teachers have a critical role in creating 
a supportive learning environment that refl ects the particular needs 
of all students. Educators should ensure that classroom practices and 
resources positively and accurately refl ect diverse perspectives, and 
should reject prejudiced attitudes and discriminatory behaviours.
To contribute to achievement of equity and quality in education, the 
Grade One Elementary Visual Arts curriculum:
•     refl ects students’ abilities, needs, interests, and learning styles;
•     expects that all students will be successful regardless of gender, 
racial and ethnocultural background, socio-economic status, 
lifestyle, or ability;
•     enables students to value individual variation among members of 
their classroom community.
To enhance students’ ability to appreciate diversity, instructional 
practices need to:
•     foster a learning community which is free from bias and unfair 
practices;
•     promote opportunities to develop positive self-images that 
enable students to transcend stereotypes and develop as 
individuals;
•     promote communication and understanding among those who 
differ in attitude, knowledge, points of view, and dialect, as well 
as among those who are similar;
•     encourage and enable students to question their own 
assumptions, and to imagine, understand, and appreciate 
realities other than their own;
•     promote the equitable sharing of resources, including teacher 
attention and support;
•     encourage students to examine and critique materials and   
experiences for bias and prejudice;
•     examine historical and current equity and bias issues;
•     promote opportunities in non-traditional occupations;
•     encourage students to challenge prejudice and discrimination.

14
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
14
CONTEXTS FOR LEARNING AND TEACHING
Cross-Curricular and 
Integrated Learning
Visual arts education promotes a commitment to equity by valuing, 
appreciating, and accepting the diverse multicultural and multiracial 
nature of society, as well as by fostering awareness and critical analysis 
of individual and systematic discrimination. Visual arts education 
encourages students to question their own assumptions, and to 
imagine, understand, and appreciate realities other than their own.
In the cross-curricular learning, students are provided with   
oppor
tunities to learn and use related content and/or skills in two 
or more subjects. For example, all subjects, including the arts, can 
be related to the language arts curriculum. In the arts, students use 
a range of language skills: they build subject specifi c vocabulary, 
read stories for inspiration for their art works, and respond to and 
analyse art works using language. Teachers can also use reading 
material about the arts in their language lessons, and can incorporate 
instruction in critical literacy in their arts lessons by, for instance, 
having students develop alternative illustrations for books in the 
grade one curriculum. Students can also use drama to bring to life 
the motivations of minor characters who have other perspectives on 
the story and then create a collage or a sculpture of that character.
In integrated learning, students are provided with opportunities to 
work towards meeting specifi c curriculum outcomes from two or 
more subjects within a single unit, lesson, or activity. By linking 
expectations from diff erent subject areas, teachers can provide 
students with multiple opportunities to reinforce and demonstrate 
their knowledge and skills in a range of settings. Th  e arts can be used 
to provide other  ways of learning and making connections. Th  rough  
integrated learning, exploration of topics, issues, experiences, or 
themes can provide students with the stimulus both for engaging in 
artistic creation and for developing understanding in other subject 
areas. For example, teachers can create a unit linking expectations 
from the arts curriculum and the social studies curriculum. 
Connections can be made between these curricula in a number of 
areas, including the relationship between art forms and their social 
and cultural context at various times and places around the world, 
the importance of the arts in Canada, and the impact of changes in 
technology on the arts (e.g., use of multimedia technology). In such 
a unit, students can gain insights into the importance of the arts 
for a range of people. Th  ey can also, for instance, work with drama 
or dance movement to express their understanding of a historical 
character or a visual art work, and through that activity develop 
imagery that refl ects their own ideas, time, and place.
Integrated learning can also be a solution to fragmentation and 
isolated skill instruction- that is, in integrated learning, students 
can learn and apply skills in a meaningful context, students can also 
develop their ability to think and reason and to transfer knowledge 
and skills from one subject area to another.

15
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
15
CONTEXTS FOR LEARNING AND TEACHING
Education for    
Sustainable      
Development (ESD)
Education for sustainable development (ESD) involves incorporating 
the key themes of sustainable development - such as poverty 
alleviation, human rights, health, environmental protection and 
climate change - into the education system. ESD is a complex and 
evolving concept and requires learning about these key themes from a 
social, cultural, environmental and economic perspective and explores 
how those factors are inter-related and inter-dependent.
With this in mind, it is important that all teachers, including visual 
arts teachers, attempt to incorporate these key themes in their subject 
areas. One tool that can be used is the searchable on-line database 
Resources for Rethinking, found at http://r4r.ca/en. It provides 
teachers with access to materials that integrate ecological, social and 
economic spheres through active, relevant, interdisciplinary learning. 
Visual arts education promotes a commitment to equity by valuing, 
appreciating, and accepting the diverse multicultural and multiracial 
nature of society, as well as by fostering awareness and critical analysis 
of individual and systematic discrimination. Visual arts education 
encourages students to question their own assumptions, and to 
imagine, understand, and appreciate realities other than their own.
The Prince Edward Island visual arts curriculum is committed to the 
principle that learners of English as an additional language (EAL) 
should be full participants in all aspects of visual arts education. 
English profi ciency and cultural differences must not be a barrier to full 
participation. All students should study a comprehensive visual arts 
curriculum with high-quality instruction and coordinated assessment.
The UNESCO, “Road Map for Arts Education, The World 
Conference on Arts Education: Building Capacities for the 21st 
Century” (2006) “encourages linguistic diversity while respecting 
the mother tongue at all levels of education, whenever possible and 
fostering the learning of several languages from the earliest age, 
(p. 6).” Therefore it is important to recognize that all students, and 
EAL learners in particular, need to have opportunities and be given 
encouragement and support for speaking, writing, reading, and 
listening in visual arts classes.
To this end:
•     schools should provide EAL learners with the support in their 
dominant language and English language while learning visual 
arts;
•     teachers, counselors, and other professionals shoul