 a FAX from an
outside individual.
•   Practice using email and send a
message to other classmates.
Tinkering  With  Technology
Suggestions

57
Journey On -  P.E.I.  Department  of  Education,  2005
Grade1
Lesson Plan:
Schools are making extensive use of the buddy system where a student from a
higher grade becomes a mentor for a student in a lower grade. In this activity, a
student from one of the higher grades sends a message or story to a student in
grade 1. Once the message has been sent by e-mail, the older buddy assists the
younger student with retrieving the e-mail and reading the message. A good
activity that encourages collaboration and co-operative learning, this exercise
exposes the younger students to the concept of communicating with technology
and gives the older students time to reinforce their skills.
E-mail  Buddies
Activity
Resources
•  E-mail access
Instructions
1. The message sent by the older buddy could take many forms. It can be a
message about a personal experience, a short story which the older student
has written, or discussion about a book that they have read together.
2. The older student can help the younger student login to their account, access
the e-mail software and then read the message that was sent to younger
student.
3. If desired, the younger student, with the help of the buddy, could formulate
and send a reply.
Outcomes
Technology:  A2.1, B2.1, E2.1,
E2.2, E2.3, E2.8
Language Arts:  (Emergent) 2.1,
2.3, 5.1, 8.1, 8.2  (Early)  10.4
Health:  Refer to personal safety/
abuse prevention supplement to
the Family Life Education
curriculum guide, grade 1 and 2

Grade1
58
Journey On -  P.E.I.  Department  of  Education,  2005
Lesson Plan:
OutcomesActivity
Students are challenged to construct a picture or shape using the set of on-screen
geometric shapes that are contained in a graphics file. On screen puzzles such as
these provide the learner with the opportunity to explore geometric shapes and
relationships. They also encourage the development of problem solving skills
and spatial reasoning.
•  AppleWorks Drawing software
•  Appleworks files:
Puzzles 1
Resources
G1draw1.cwk
G1draw2.cwk
G1puzz1.cwk
G1puzz2.cwk
G1puzzle3.cwk
Graphics programs provide an ideal environment for exploring and experiment-
ing with geometric shapes and relationships. They can be used to help students
develop eye- hand coordination (mouse skills) and aspects of spatial sense.
Graphics programs are particularly well suited for activities that involve:
•  problem solving (puzzles) and the concept of multiple solutions
•  reinforcement of shape recognition
•  investigating and predicting the results of combining and subdividing shapes
Instructions
1. Open the activity of choice  and use the SAVE AS command (under FILE) to
save the file with a different name. This is to prevent over-writing the template
file. (Teachers can have students download these files from the online site or
teachers can download the files and then send all the files to students.)
2. Some of these files require that the student creates his/her own shapes.
However, most of these files involve the student moving the geometric shape
into place. In some activities the shape must first be duplicated. To do this,
click on the shape to select it. You will see little handles on the corner of the
shape when it is selected. Next hold down the CTRL key and, while holding it
down, tap the D key once. This will make a duplicate of the shape. Tapping the
D more than once will make extra copies. As an alternative to using the
CTRL/D combination, select the shape, click on EDIT and then click on
Duplicate.
Technology:  A5.1, B5.1
Math:  E1, E3, E5, E7, E10

59
Journey On -  P.E.I.  Department  of  Education,  2005
Grade1
Lesson Plan:
3. Once the puzzle is completed the student can save it or print it to include it in
his/ her math folder.
Suggestions
•  Have students create their own
puzzles for another individual
to solve.
Helpful  Hints
•  The most important thing to remember is to make an extra copy of any
activity file AND have students use the SAVE AS command as soon as they
open the file.
•  If a puzzle piece becomes distorted as a result of resizing, close the file and
restart. If you have been saving every few minutes you will not have lost too
much work, and the puzzle piece will be back to the correct size for you to
continue.
•  Have students work in pairs to encourage collaborative learning.
Puzzles 1

Grade1
60
Journey On -  P.E.I.  Department  of  Education,  2005
Lesson Plan:
1. Brainstorm as a class responses to the question “What is a living thing?” (You
may find using Inspiration software and an LCD helpful, or more traditional
means such as chart paper, word cards, or pictures from picture files.)
2. Sort and categorize with the students their responses.
3. Create graphic representations of students understandings of what a living
thing is, such as through the following activity options:
a) Living Things Quilt
Use Ultimate Writing and Creativity Center or AppleWorks to create graphics
of living things in coloring book format (black and white). Print off the pages
and have students colour their pictures. Display in a quilt format.
b) Class Book
Use Ultimate Writing and Creativity Center or AppleWorks to create text and
graphics in response to the statement ‘If I could be an animal(plant), I would
be _____________ because ... “. Prepare a class book of the printed creations
to share with parents/other classes.
•  Use picture cards of a variety
of objects to have students
create two piles - one for living
and one for non-living. Make
anecdotal notes of your
observations.
Living  Things
Resources
Basic steps for Ultimate Writing and Creativity Center:
http://www.edu.pe.ca/journeyon/pro_d_pages/UWCC_basics/
index.htm
AppleWorks Information:
http://www.edu.pe.ca/journeyon/pro_d_pages/appleworks.htm
Inspiration 7.5 Information:
http://www.edu.pe.ca/journeyon/pro_d_pages/Using_Inspiration/
inspiration7.htm
Activity
Outcomes
Suggestions
Technology:  A4.3, A4.4, A4.5
Science:  100-8, 200-1, 203-4
Language Arts:  (Emergent) 1.1,
1.2, 10.3
Visual Arts:  1.2.1, 1.4.3
Lesson plan created by:  Michele
Carragher, Heather Cudmore,
Shelley Lamphier-Flood, Sarah
Grace Schurman and Elizabeth
Tumblin.

61
Journey On -  P.E.I.  Department  of  Education,  2005
Grade1
Lesson Plan:
Comparison Chart
1. Discuss how living things are the same and how they are different.
2. Explore specific websites in small groups to find out information about
specific plants/animals.
3. Record the information found in a comparison chart using words and
pictures. [Columns could include how the chosen living thing is the same as,
or different from the student, using categories to compare the looks, size,
movement, and means of breathing.]
4. Have students share what they learned with the class.
Comparing  Living  Things
Activity
Outcomes
Resources
•  Sample learning log
•  Island School Website Themes found at:
http://www.edu.pe.ca/journeyon/resources_pages/websites/
WebSitesbyTheme.htm
•  Internet Search Engines
Technology:  B8.1
Science:  100-8, 200-1, 203-4
Language Arts:  (Emergent) 1.1,
1.2, 10.3
Reflection
Have students draw a picture of one thing they learned from their research, and
one thing they learned from someone else’s research. They may wish to use
words as well.
Sample learning log:
Living Things
Learning Log Name : __________ Something I learned myself
... Something I learned from someone else ...
Lesson plan created by:  Michele
Carragher, Heather Cudmore,
Shelley Lamphier-Flood, Sarah
Grace Schurman and Elizabeth
Tumblin.

Grade1
62
Journey On -  P.E.I.  Department  of  Education,  2005
Lesson Plan:
OutcomesActivity
Graphics programs provide an ideal environment for exploring and experiment-
ing with geometric patterns and relationships. In Shapes ‘n Patterns, students
work alone or in pairs to create and extend pattern sequences with geometric
shapes. Different activities which are based on the same concepts are suggested
for grades 1-3. A number of math and art outcomes are addressed for these
grade levels. This type of activity involves collaborative learning, problem
solving, creative thinking and encourages the development of hand-eye coordi-
nation.
•  AppleWorks Drawing
•  Appleworks Files:
Technology:  A5.1, B5.1
Math:  C4, E3
Visual Arts: 1.1.2, 1.6.2, 1.7.2
Patterning  With  Shapes
Instructions
Preparation - Involve the class in a discussion about patterns. Have the stu-
dents look about the class and point out patterns that they see on books,
clothing, wallpaper, curtains, etc. Discuss with the class the fact that patterns can
be created by repeated elements such as lines, colours, shapes, etc. Even numbers
can be used to create patterns.
In the computer lab - Any graphics program can be used for this exercise.
However, AppleWorks Drawing allows the beginning user the greatest ease
when editing, moving and deleting objects that they have created. AppleWorks is
required if you wish to use the files listed in the Materials section.
Duplicating objects - In most cases, students will be creating patterns using
shapes that they have drawn. Once a shape is created it can be duplicated as
follows: Select the shape by clicking on it. If the shape is composed of more
than one object hold the SHIFT key down to select all the components. You will
see little handles on the corners of the objects when they are selected. In the
following example, 3 objects are selected to make one component of the repeat
pattern used (see bottom of this page).
Resources
G1patt1.cwk
G1patt2.cwk

63
Journey On -  P.E.I.  Department  of  Education,  2005
Grade1
Lesson Plan:Patterning  With  Shapes
Instructions (continued)
Next hold down the CTRL key, and, while holding the key down, tap the D key
once. This will make a duplicate of the shape in a similar fashion to using a
rubber stamp. Tapping the D more than once will make extra copies. As an
alternative to using the CTRL/ D combination, select the shape, click on EDIT
and then click on Duplicate.
There are a number of ways to approach the next activity.
 Students should first work with completing simple patterns such as those that
are started in the files G1patt1.cwk and G1patt2.cwk. Students should use the
SAVE AS command as soon as they open the file, and save the file under a
different name. Use the DUPLICATE command to continue the pattern.
Students can also create their own patterns by focusing on any attributes:
number of sides, orientation, shape, colour, size, etc. Encourage students to
make patterns that are not always linear and some that fill the page.
 Students can work in pairs with one partner completing a pattern that the other
partner started. For this level, encourage students to look at the characteristics of
the pattern. How are two patterns similar and how do they differ? Patterns may
be classified as repeating patterns:
Suggestions
•  SAVE frequently.
•  If you were unhappy with the
last step you made, immediately
before doing ANYTHING else,
click on EDIT and UNDO.
•  You can use the ZOOM feature
to enlarge your view on the
screen if you are working with
fine detail.

Grade1
64
Journey On -  P.E.I.  Department  of  Education,  2005
Lesson Plan:
OutcomesActivity
A graphics program is both a tool and a medium for the developing artist.
Within the graphics environment, students can explore and experiment with
relationships and properties of geometric shapes. As students engage in using
graphics programs they are learning how to think creatively and problem solve.
In this introductory lesson, students use the on-screen tools to create artwork
with basic geometric shapes.
•  Graphics program such as AppleWorks Drawing
•  Adventures in Art 1
Technology:  A5.1, B5.1
Math:  E3, E5, E10
Visual Arts:  1.1.4, 1.2.1, 1.2.2
Shapes Make Pictures
Resources
Background
The Mouse - While the mouse can vary, the basic variety has a left and right
button, and a little movable ball on the underside. The mouse is used for
opening, closing, moving and resizing windows. In graphics programs it is also
used to manipulate objects about the screen. In word processing applications it is
used to select text and move the cursor about the document. The mouse has
three operations:
1) Clicking - to move the cursor or select an object, the left mouse button is
clicked once. The right button is only used in some programs for special func-
tions. However, the settings for these two buttons can be switched to make
clicking easier for the left-handed user.
2) Double-clicking - clicking the left mouse button quickly twice in succession
without moving the mouse in between clicks.
3) Dragging - click the left mouse button and hold it down while moving the
mouse pointer across the screen. This allows for text to be selected and selected
objects to be moved.
Instructions
Preparation - Ask students to name some of the shapes that they know. Ask the
students to look around the class and identify shapes in objects in their class-
room. What shape is the most common? Have them look at artworks such as
that by Takeo Yamaguchi on page 15 of Adventures in Art and identify the
shapes that they see.
In the computer lab - Any graphics program can be used for this exercise,
however AppleWorks Drawing allows the beginning user the greatest ease when
editing, moving and deleting objects that they have drawn. For simplicity sake,
only brief reminders of features that students need to know to complete this
exercise are mentioned here.

65
Jour