ubject  areas,  teachers  may  more  efficiently  address  curriculum  outcomes  within
classroom  instruction.
•The  heart  symbol  
Ìis  used  to  identify  outcomes  that  should  be  addressed  with  sensitivity.
It  is  important  to  know  your  students  and  to  consider  what  outcomes/issues  should  be
handled  with  care.
•In  column  4,  Other  Suggested  Resources  (such  as  books,  posters,  and  reference  materials)  are
listed.  Teachers  are  encouraged  to  use  a  variety  of  resources  to  address  the  curriculum
outcomes.  As  always,  when  using  a  resource  that  is  not  authorized,  please  preview  to  deter-
mine  if  it  is  appropriate  for  the  intended  purpose.
•Teachers  in  the  Eastern  School  District  have  access  to  a  selection  of  materials  from  the
Teacher’s  Resource  Centre.  Also,  Western  School  Board  teachers  are  encouraged  to  visit  the
Little  Red  School  House  for resources.  Teachers  are  encouraged  to  use  the  Confederation
Centre  Library  and  to  consult  with  the  teacher-librarians  in  their  schools  for  updated  video/
DVD  lists  as  well  as  other  resources.
•Consider  community  opportunities  when  planning.  Be  aware  of  designated  days,  weeks,  or
months  (such  as  Remembrance  Day,  Earth  Day,  Aboriginal  Awareness  Week,  Seniors’  Month)
to  address  topics  that  complement  the  social  studies  curriculum.
•Teachers  may  become  familiar  with  social  studies  concepts  completed  in  kindergarten  by
reviewing  Entry  outcomes  located  on  page  23  of  this  document.
YEAR  OVERVIEW



39
ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
Unit 1: Groups
Overview
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
Opportunities  for
Integration
Anticipated Time  for
Completion
In  the  first  outcome  in  this  unit,  children  will  gain  an  understand-
ing  of  the  various  kinds  of  interactions  between  people,  and  the
importance  of  belonging  to  a  group.  They  will  consider  how
interactions  depend  upon  communication.  In  the  second  outcome,
children  explore  the  similarity  and  diversity  of  social  and  cultural
groups  and  the  reasons  why  people  belong  to  groups.  They  will  also
learn  that  children  form  a  unique  group  of  their  own.  In  the  third
outcome,  children  will  develop  an  awareness  that  people  within
groups  have  rights  and  responsibilities.  This  outcome  includes  a
review  of  how  groups  operate  by  formal  and  informal  rules,  and
shows  that  conflicts  may  arise  within  a  group.  Students  will  further
their  understanding  of  how  conflict  can  be  resolved  by  peaceful
means,  how  co-operation  and  working  together  is  an  important  part
of  group  behaviour,  and  how  they  as  children  have  responsibilities
too.
Students will be expected to
1.1.1demonstrate  an  understanding  of  the  importance  of
interactions  between  people
1.1.2demonstrate  an  understanding  of  the  similarity  and
diversity  of  social  and  cultural  groups
1.1.3demonstrate  an  understanding  that  people  within  groups
have  rights  and  responsibilities
Please  note  that  in  this  unit  opportunities  for  connections  with
health  and  science  outcomes  are  referenced  in  column  4.
It  is  suggested  that  this  unit  be  completed  during  the  months  of
September  and  October.
Outcomes

40ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
OutcomesElaborations - Strategies for Learning and Teaching
 Students will be expected to
Unit 1: Groups
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
1.1.1  demonstrate  an  understanding
of  the  importance  of  interactions
between  people
•Have  students  engage  with  an  appropriate  book  as  a  read  aloud.
The  selected  book  should  address  simple  interactions  between
people.  Engage  students  in  a  discussion  of  examples  of
interaction  and  communication  in  the  book.  Brainstorm  with
the  students  ways  that  people  interact  and  communicate  with
each  other.  Record  student  responses  on  chart  paper.
•Challenge  students  to  create  a  circular  graph.  Provide  each
student  with  a  page  with  a  large  circle  drawn  on  it.  Have
students  fold  their  papers  in  half,  then  in  quarters,  and  then
unfold  the  paper  and  number  the  sections  from  one  to  four.
Have  students  recall  interactions  from  the  day,  and  draw  a
representation  on  each  part  of  their  circle  (e.g.,  breakfast  at
home,  playing  with  brother/sister,  riding  bus  to  school,  reading
with  their  teacher).  Have  students  share  their  graphs  with  the
class,  encouraging  students  to  explain  how  they  interacted  with
people  and  the  types  of  communication  used  during  the
interaction.
•Have  students  participate  in  a  communication  game  (e.g.,
charades)  that  begins  with  one  student  volunteer  leaving  the
room.  The  remainder  of  the  class  will  then  agree  on  an  action
that  they  want  the  student  volunteer  to  attempt  upon
returning  to  class  (e.g.,  pick  up  a  ball).  Students  cannot
verbally  tell  or  use  a  concrete  object  to  show  the  student  what
to  do.  To  demonstrate  that  interactions  require  communication,
conclude  the  activity  by  talking  about  how  the  task  could  be
completed  in  other  ways,  such  as  by  using  spoken  or  written
language.
•Invite  students  to  examine  various  ways  that  people  communi-
cate  with  each  other.  Have  students  express  how  they  would
feel  and  act.  Some  examples  would  include  kind  words,  angry
words,  acts  of  kindness,  and  unkind  acts.  Teachers  may  wish  to
have  students  role-play  various  scenarios.
Teacher Talk
The  focus  of  this  outcome  is  to  help  children  recognize  instances
of  daily  interactions  and  understand  that  communication  goes
hand  in  hand  with  the  many  interactions  that  are  an  important
part  of  their  lives.  The  meaning  of  the  term  interaction  is
defined  in  this  outcome  as  an  action  involving  two  or  more
people.

41ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
Tasks  for  Instruction  and/or  Assessment
Resources/Notes
Unit 1: Groups
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
Discovery  Links
(Authorized  Resource)
Big Book
•People  and  Places
“No  Loud  Voices”
Little  Book
•Do You Communicate
Poster
•Living  in  Harmony
The  Nystrom  Jumbo  Atlas
(Authorized  Resource)
“Who  goes  to  school?”  p.2
“How  do  we  get  along?”  p.3
“Where  do  these  families  live?”  p.4
Cross Curricular Links
Formal/Informal  Observation
•During  class  discussions  and  activities,  assess  students
understanding  of  the  importance  of  interactions/
communication  among  people.  Teachers  may  note  students’
understanding  of  appropriate  and  inappropriate  interactions/
communication.
Journal
•Have  students  create  a  journal  entry  showing  an  interaction
they  experience  at  home  and  at  school.  Responses  may  include
pictures,  words,  or  pictures  and  words.  Invite  students  to  share
their  entries.
Paper  and  Pencil
•Invite  students  to  participate  in  an  Act  of  Kindness  day.  Ask
students  to  use  as  many  friendly  words  and  actions  as  they  can
during  the  day.  Challenge  students  to  create  an  Act  of  Kindness
award  to  give  to  another  student  to  acknowledge  his/her
friendly  words  or  actions.  This  award  should  include  a  picture
or  words  showing  the  Act  of  Kindness  that  is  being
acknowledged.
Presentation
•Have  students,  during  a  class  discussion,  use  information  from
their  circle  graphs  to  complete  the  following  class  chart.
Science
•Grade  1  Integrated  Unit  —
Interactions:  Making  Sense  of
My  World
Science  Literature  Support
•Brown  Rabbits  Day
by  Alan  Baker
•A Chair For My Mother by
Vera  B.  Williams
Health
•Relationship  Choices
Outcomes  R-1.1  and  R-1.4
BLM  R-1.1
?odIdidtahWIdidtahW
?raeh/yas
)noitacinummoC(
?eesIdidtahWtisiyhW
?tnatropmi
nogniyalP-
htiwgniws
.ssecertasdneirf
".snrutekats'teL"-
".wonnrutyms'tI"-
".uoyknahT"-
gnirahssdneirF-
.snrutgnikatdna
tfelstegenooN-
.tuo
.truhstegenooN-
sklatenoyrevE-
.ylecin

42ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
OutcomesElaborations - Strategies for Learning and Teaching
 Students will be expected to
Unit 1: Groups
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
1.1.2  demonstrate  an  understanding
of  the  similarity  and  diversity  of  social
and  cultural  groups
Teacher Talk
In  this  outcome,  children  will  gain  an  understanding  of  how
people,  including  children,  join  together  to  form  social  and
cultural  groups,  and  learn  some  of  the  characteristics  of
groups  that  bring  people  together.  For  this  outcome  a  social
group  is  defined  as  a  group  of  people  sharing  some  social
connection  (e.g.,  friends,  community,  club),  while  a  cultural
group  is  defined  as  a  human-made  system  built  by  a  group  of
people  and  passed  on  from  generation  to  generation  (e.g.,
food,  music,  language,  religion,  sports).  This  outcome
expands  upon  Entry  outcome  E.2.2  where  students  discussed
traditions,  rituals,  and  celebrations  in  their  families.
(Opportunities  may  arise  where  examples  of  various  types  of
groups  may  come  from  local,  national,  or  global  contexts.)
•Have  students  engage  with  an  appropriate  book  as  a  read  aloud.
The  selected  book  should  provide  examples  of  different  social
and  cultural  groups.  Have  students  explore  the  similarities  and
differences  between  social  and  cultural  groups  identified  in  the
book.
•Invite  students  to  discuss  how  they  are  members  of  groups.
Provide  each  student  with  a  paper  circle  and  a  number  of  pre-
cut  flower  petals.  Have  students  place  their  names  in  the  centre
of the  circles.  On  each  petal  have  students  record  in  written  or
pictorial  form  a  group  to  which  they  belong.  (Possible  groups
include  family,  friends,  club,  class,  culture,  etc.)  Have  students
paste  their  petals  around  their  flower  centre  to  demonstrate  the
number  of  groups  to  which  they  belong.  A  discussion  on  the
common  characteristics  of  groups  could  be  used  as  a  conclusion
for  this  activity.
•Invite  students  to  think  about  why  people  join  groups.  As  a
class  complete  a  chart  that  identifies  the  following:
-  Name  of  group
-  What  we  do
-  What  we  believe
-  Why  we  join
Debrief  the  activity  with  a  discussion  of  how  groups  have
similarities  and  differences.
•Have  students  design  a  badge  that  demonstrates  a  social  or
cultural  group  to  which  they  belong.  The  badge  identifies  some
of  the  characteristics  of  the  group.  Have  students  share  their
badges  with  the  class.  As  a  class,  note  similarities  and
differences  among  groups.

43ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
Tasks  for  Instruction  and/or  Assessment
Resources/Notes
Unit 1: Groups
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
Discovery  Links
(Authorized  Resource)
Formal/Informal  Observation
•Observe  and  note  the  vocabulary  used,  questions  asked,  and
responses/opinions  given  as  students  discuss  the  similarity  and
diversity  of  social  and  cultural  groups.  Teachers  may  wish  to
assess  student  progress  in  this  outcome  throughout  the  year  as
various  social  and  cultural  groups  are  discussed.
Paper  and  Pencil
•Have  students,  as  a  class  or  with  a  partner,  create  a  Venn
diagram  to  show  how  two  groups,  social  and  cultural,  are  the
same,  and  how  they  are  different.
Presentation
•Invite  students  to  work  with  a  partner  or  small  group  to  role-
play  why  social  and  cultural  groups  get  together  and  do
particular  things  (e.g.,  family  picnic,  friends  playing,  cultural
celebration  or  holiday).  Involve  students  in  a  discussion  of
which  type  of  group  participates  in  this  activity.  Does  the
activity  involve  a  social  group,  cultural  group,  or  both?
Big Book
•People  and  Places
“Bread,  Bread,  Bread”
“Dances  Around  the  World”
“Everyone  Says  ‘Hello’”
Little  Book
•We  All  Belong
Poster
•Living  in  Harmony
The  Nystrom  Jumbo  Atlas
(Authorized  Resource)
“How  do  we  get  along?”  p.3
Cross Curricular Links
Science
•Grade  1  Integrated  Unit  —
Interactions:  Making  Sense  of
My  World
Science  Literature  Support
•Shoes, Shoes, Shoes
by  Ann  Morris
•Chrysanthemum
by  Kevin  Henkes
•My World Seasons
by Tammy Schlepp
•Yo k o
by  Rosemary  Wells
Health
•Relationship  Choices
Outcome  R-1.9

44ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
OutcomesElaborations - Strategies for Learning and Teaching
 Students will be expected to
Unit 1: Groups
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
1.1.3  demonstrate  an  understanding
that  people  within  groups  have  rights
and  responsibilities
•Engage  the  students  with  an  appropriate  book  as  a  read  aloud.
The  selected  book  should  provide  examples  of  the  rights  and
responsibilities  of  people  that  are  specific  to  children.  Invite
each  student  to  create  a  page  for  a  class  Rights  and  Responsi-
bilities  Big  Book.  Each  student  will  complete  a  two-page  spread,
creating  illustrations  and  using  possible  prompts,  such  as,
I have a right to                 .
I  have  a  responsibility  to                 .
Once  the  book  is  completed,  have  students  share  their  book
with  another  class  in  the  school.
•Challenge  students  to  create  a  Class  Charter  of  Rights  and
Responsibilities.  Have  children  discuss  their  rights  and
responsibilities  as  class  members.  A  sample  charter  is  shown  below:
Class Charter of Rights and Responsibilities
Student  Rights
I  have  a  right...
To  give  my  opinion
To borrow books from
the  library
To  be  treated  with  kindness
To  do  my  work  without
interruption
To work in a clean classroom
Student  Responsibilities
I  have  a  responsibility...
To  listen  to  others
To  return  books  on  time
and  in  good  order  to  the  library
To  treat  others  with  kindness
To  let  others  do  their  work
without  interruption
To  keep  my  classroom  clean
•Have  the  class  brainstorm  possible  scenarios  for  student  pairs  to
use  in  a  role-play  on  how  to  solve  conflicts.  Invite  student  pairs
to  create  puppets  and  use  them  to  role-play  an  example  of  how
to  solve  a  conflict  through  peaceful  means.  (Teachers  may  wish
to  make  reference  to  Health  BLM  R-1.7  to  assist  students  with
their  presentations.)
Invite  the  principal  to  the  class  for  students  to  share  their  class
charter.
Teacher Talk
This  outcome  is  intended  to  help  students  understand  that
people  have  rights  (things  that  all  people  need  to  live  or  need
to  be  able  to  do)  and  responsibilities  (things  that  people  must
answer  for),  and  provides  an  opportunity  to  explore  rights  and
responsibilities  that  are  specific  to  children.  Students  will  also
become  aware  of  how  conflicts  may  arise  within  a  group  and
how  co-operative  and  peaceful  methods  work  in  resolving
issues.  Using  age-appropriate  actions,  students  will  be  able  to
demonstrate  their  understanding  of  being  a  responsible
citizen.  (Opportunities  may  arise  where  examples  demonstrating
the  responsibilities of  citizens  come  from  local,  national,  or
global  contexts.)

45ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
Tasks  for  Instruction  and/or  Assessment
Resources/Notes
Unit 1: Groups
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
Discovery  Links
(Authorized  Resource)
Formal/Informal  Observation
•Observe  and  note  student  vocabulary  and  responses/opinions
given  during  student  discussions  to  assess  student’s  understand-
ing  of  the  rights  and  responsibilities  of  people  within  groups.
Paper  and  Pencil
•Invite  students  to  create  a  poster  showing  a  right  and  a
responsibility  they  have  as  members  of  their  school.  Have
students present  their  posters  to  the  class.  The  posters  may  be
used  to  complete  a  class  book  on  the  rights  and  responsibilities
of  the  student  body.  Have  the  class  present  their  book  to  the
principal.
•Have  students  as  a  class  discuss  playground  behaviour  and  how
they  would  resolve  conflicts.  Provide  a  small  group  with  a
playground  scenario  (e.g.,  students  pushing  into  the  line  for  the
slide,  someone  taking  another  student’s  toy).  Ask  the  group  to
discuss  what  rights  and  responsibilities  students  have  on  the
playground,  and  what  they  would  do  to  resolve  the  chosen
conflict  through  peaceful  means.  Have  them  create  a  poster  on
how  to  resolve the  conflict  and  then  present  their  poster  to  the
class  to  facilitate  a  discussion  of  how  to  resolve  conflicts  on  the
playground.  Teachers  may  also  wish  students  to  share  their
posters  with  another  class.
Presentation
•Have  students  use  pictures  from  book/magazines  to  create  a
collage  to  demonstrate  the  rights  and  responsibilities  of  citizens.
•Have  students  role-play  different  conflict  scenarios,  such  as
someone  refusing  to  play  by  the  rules  of  a  game,  or  taking  a
personal  item  that  does  not  belong  to  them.  Have  students
discuss  their  rights  and  responsibilities  in  the  scenario.
Teachers  may  wish  students  to  use  the  prompts,
I have the right to                                                          , and
I have the responsibility to                                               .
Have  students  demonstrate  peaceful  means  of  resolving  the
conflict.
Big Book
•People  and  Places
“Too Much Too Soon”
Little  Book
•My  Rights  and  Responsibilities
Poster
•Living  in  Harmony
Photo  Cards
•Co-operation  and  Conflict
Resolution
Cross Curricular Links
Health
 •    Relationship  Choices
Outcome  R-1.7
•Relationship  Choices
BLM  R-1.7



49
ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
Unit 2: Environments
Overview
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
Opportunities  for
Integration
Anticipated Time  for
Completion
Outcomes
This  unit  provides  a  great  opportunity  for  the  teacher  to  encourage
students  to  explore  the  wider  community  on  a  provincial,  national,
and  global  level.  The  first  outcome  introduces  the  geographic
concepts  of  natural  and  constructed  features.  It  extends  an
understanding  of  these  concepts  beyond  the  local  area  as  students
learn  about  other  examples  from  their  province,  country,  and
around  the  world.  In  the  second  outcome,  children  will  investigate
how  people  depend  upon  and  interact  with  different  natural
environments.  They  will  develop  an  awareness  that  such  things  as
climate  and  weather,  natural  features,  and  the  presence  of  natural
environments  influence  human  activity.  In  the  third  outcome,
childr