 be able to... 
 Use appropriate tools, such as safety glue and scissors, for manipulating materials when 
building objects       
 Collaborate to propose answers to identified problems during the design process   
 Compare and evaluate personally constructed objects with respect to their design and 
function  
 Demonstrate ways to reduce, reuse, and recycle materials during classroom learning 
experiences.  
 Create a product that is functional and aesthetically pleasing to the user by safely 
selecting, combining, and modifying materials 
 
 
 
  
  

PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1 35 
 
Elaboration 
Focus Question: How can we build objects which meet specific needs? 
When students have identified properties of various materials they should be prepared to use 
their knowledge to select appropriate materials for the objects that they will construct. Students 
should also explore how objects can be made from recycled or reused material.  Students are 
expected to solve a problem or task involving a variety of senses. Students could design and 
create: 
 
 a simple device that can make a variety 
of sounds 
 a container that can hold the most 
marbles without breaking 
 a trophy for Sailor in The Stayashore 
Newfoundland Dog 
 a house for Mrs. Chicken and the 
Hungry Crocidle 
 a container that can hold sand 
 
  
Before they create their product, students should engage in activities that demonstrate various 
ways of joining materials. Twisted paper clips with straws, soaked peas stuck on toothpicks and 
left to dry, safety glue with stir sticks, Velcro 
TM
, marshmallows stuck on toothpicks, and other 
methods of joining materials can be used. 
 
Working in pairs, students can plan their design, discuss the materials they are going to use and 
how they will join them together. As problems arise during the design and construction phases, 
students should be encouraged to work together to create solutions. When they have finished 
their construction, they can show their product to the rest of the class, explain what it does, and 
why they chose those particular materials and design. The products they create should be of their 
own design, and as such, should not be the same as others in their class. 
 
Cross Curricular Links 
 
Health:    L-1.2, L-1.2, L-1.3 
Language Arts:    Literacy Place: Read Aloud – Mrs. Chicken and the Hungry Crocodile, 
Sailor: The Hangashore Newfoundland Dog 
Mathematics: 
The Quiltmakers Gift 
Social Studies:    1.2.3 
Technology: 
 
Visual Arts:    CP1.1, CP1.4, RRA1.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

36 PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1  
 
 
Science 1  -  Life Science (LS) - Needs and Characteristics of Living Things 
Specific Curriculum Outcome 
Students will be expected to... 
LS – 1 distinguish between characteristics that make plants and animals unique  
 
 
 Grade 1 Grade 2 
 LS – 1 Distinguish between 
characteristics that make 
plants and animals unique  
 
Animal Growth and Change 
Contrast human growth and 
development with that of other 
organisms. 
 
Achievement Indicators 
     Students who have achieved this outcome should be able to... 
 Classify animals and plants in groups according to one or more characteristic (such as:  
size, colour, where they live, ...) 
 
 
  
*Excerpt from: The PEI Science Safety Resource Manual 
 
Teachers are responsible for familiarizing themselves with any local, provincial, or federal 
statutes pertaining to the care of plants or animals. If in doubt, inquire. Pet shops or plant shops 
may have useful information. Remember that there are regulations preventing the picking of wild 
flowers, or the captive use of migratory birds or endangered species. The following are some 
guidelines for the care of plants and animals in the classroom: 
• Be wary of any possible signs of allergic reactions among students to any plants or animals. 
• Inform the administration before bringing any animals into the school. 
• Inquire about specific feeding and facility requirements for classroom pets. 
• Be wary of possible diseases that may be spread by animals, or by people to animals. 
• Poisonous animals and plants, or other potentially dangerous animals such as venomous 
snakes and spiders should not be kept in the classroom. 
• Wear gloves when handling animals in the classroom. Over-handling can put the animals 
under excessive stress. 
• Involve students in helping to care for plants and animals. 
• Make arrangements to have the plants and animals looked after over holidays and on 
weekends. 
  
 Identify and use common terms for parts of humans, other animals, and plants  
 Record observations and measurements about animals* and plants, using written 
language, pictures, and charts  

PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1 37 
 
Elaboration 
 
Focus question:  What makes plants and animals unique? 
 
Through many hands-on experiences students should have the opportunity to explore what 
makes each plant and animal unique within their species.  What makes a dog different from a 
cat?  A cactus different than a dandelion? 
 
Students should be given the chance to investigate various plants and animals in their natural 
environment.  In cases where plants and animals are not local, there should be a variety of 
pictures or videos of living things for students to examine and classify.  By comparing a number 
of different plants and animals, students should identify similarities and differences among the 
living things. 
 
Students should experience opportunities for communicating their observations and discoveries 
in a variety of ways (e.g., verbally, pictorially, graphically, digitally, and through demonstration).  
One way this could be done is through listening and responding to another student’s description 
of an animal or plant. 
 
Students should try to recognize which group of animals will fly, which will crawl, which will 
jump, or which will slide. Have them look at pictures of fish, birds, reptiles, and other types of 
animals and try to predict how they will move. Opportunities should be provided for students to 
use a variety of sources of information, such as observing living things, books, videos, software, 
Internet, to find answers to their questions.  
 
Cross Curricular Links 
 
Health:    W-1.4, W-1.11, W-1.11, W-1.12, W-1.13, W-1.14 
Language Arts:    Literacy Place:  
Guided Reading –  Whose Teeth are These, Memories, I am Big, A Pod 
for a Baby Orca, Come Home Bailey, A Wild Eagle Needs a Beak 
Shared Reading – Is this a Moose, The Best Pet, The Bug Hotel 
Read Aloud – Mrs. Chicken and the Hungry Crocodile, Sailor:  The 
Hangashore Newfoundland Dog  
Mathematics:    SS1    
Measuring Penny, Equal Shmequal  
Social Studies: 
 
Technology:    A3.1,    A3.2,    B8.1    
Visual Arts:    CP1.3, RRA1.2 
 
 
  

38 PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1  
 
 
Science 1  -  Needs and Characteristics of Living Things 
Specific Curriculum Outcome 
Students will be expected to... 
LS – 2  Classify the characteristics and needs of living things  
 
 
 Grade 1 Grade 2 
 LS – 2  Classify the 
characteristics and needs of 
living things  
 
Animal Growth and Change 
Assist in setting up and 
maintain a life-supporting 
environment for an organism 
such as a mealworm or 
caterpillar 
 
Achievement Indicators 
     Students who have achieved this outcome should be able to... 
 Compare common characteristics of humans, other animals, and plants 
 Observe and identify similarities and differences in living and non-living things  
 Describe ways that humans use their knowledge of living things in meeting their own 
needs and the needs of plants and animals  
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
  
  

PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1 39 
 
Elaboration 
 
Focus Question:  What are the characteristics and needs of living things? 
Classroom activities will generate questions like “Which of these things is alive?” and “What 
does it need to live?”. These questions can provide a focus for this part of the unit. Living things 
grow and change, and require air, food and water. Some questions that might be posed are “How 
do they eat?”, “How often should I water this plant?”, or “How much water do I use?”. Students 
could discuss how they care for pets and/or plants. Students could observe and care for their 
classroom plants as well as focus on a wide range of animals using a variety of resources (e.g., 
videos, internet, software, print) to learn how animals meet their needs.  
 
Students could explore ways that different animals adapt to changes in temperature (e.g., 
hibernation, migration) and the ways that the various animals move (e.g., flying, swimming, 
running) that help them live in their environment. Similarities and differences in the ways 
different animals get their food and protect themselves from danger can be explored. Students 
can also grow simple plants from seeds, take care of the plants as they grow, and recognize the 
needs of their plants.  
 
Invite the students to brainstorm characteristics of humans. This could be done together using 
Inspiration software. These characteristics could be divided into two categories – characteristics 
that are common to most people (e.g., such as hands and eyes) and characteristics that are unique 
to people (e.g., such as eye and hair colour). Be sensitive to student’s feelings, and do not do 
activities in which individual students are stigmatized for physical characteristics. Teachers 
could use classroom literature and other resources to illustrate the diversity of characteristics of 
living things. 
 
Using their knowledge of the needs of living things, students could investigate how people care 
for plants and animals in order to make sure their needs are met. This can be compared to how 
plants and animals meet their needs while growing in the wild. 
Cross Curricular Links 
 
Health:    W – 1.4, W-1.5 
Literature Resources in the Wellness Choice Package 
Language Arts:    Literacy Place:  
Guided Reading –   Grandpa’s Garden, Getting Ready for Winter, Who 
Did Jake’s Chores, A Wild Eagle Needs a Beak, A pod for a Baby Orca, 
Whose Teeth are These 
Shared Reading –  Is This a Moose, School Days – The Bug Hotel, How 
Does a Chick get out of the Egg, Caring for Speedy  
Read Aloud – Pipaluk and the Whales 
Mathematics:    SS1 
Social Studies:    1.1.1, 1.4.1, 1.4.2 
Technology:    A5.1, A4.1, A4.3, A4.4, A4.5 
Visual Arts:      

40 PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1  
 
 
Science 1  -  Earth and Space Science (ESS) - Daily and Seasonal Changes 
 
Specific Curriculum Outcome 
Students will be expected to... 
ESS – 1  Analyze daily and seasonal changes in the environment 
 
 
 Grade 1 Grade 5 
 ESS – 1  Analyze daily and 
seasonal changes in the 
environment  
 
Weather  
Display the weather data they 
have collected on charts and 
graphs and in their science 
logs. 
 
Achievement Indicators 
     Students who have achieved this outcome should be able to... 
 Use appropriate vocabulary related to changes in the environment. (e.g.,  dryer, colder, 
warmer, more than, less than)  
 Use a variety of tools (e.g., rain container, thermometer, and wind sock and techniques 
(e.g., chart, diagram, and table) to record changes in weather conditions that occur in 
daily and seasonal cycles. 
 Illustrate and record changes that occur in the environment throughout the seasons (e.g., 
flowers blooming, snow melting, leaves falling, puddles freezing) 
 Compare changes in the environment over time. (e.g., daily, weekly, monthly) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1 41 
 
Elaboration 
Focus Question: How does the environment change every day? 
Introduce charts and calendars as an efficient means for students to record their observations 
regarding daily and seasonal changes.  Teachers may wish to have a “Calendar Time” every 
morning, in which the date, day of the week, and month are identified. 
 
Students could display pictures (drawn, from magazines, or through multimedia) of seasonal 
activities of humans and living things as well as weather typical of various seasons. Have 
students describe their favourite weekly and seasonal activities to introduce the concept that the 
days of the week and the seasons have a sequence, and that this sequence is repetitive. 
 
To prepare for collecting and recording data around seasonal changes in weather, discuss with 
students what kinds of information that can be collected and how they will go about recording 
the data. Focus on the types of language, drawings, and nonstandard measurements that can be 
used to describe temperature (e.g., hot, warm, cold), light (e.g., light or dark, cloudy or sunny), 
position of the sun (e.g., drawing a picture of what they see when they look out the window, and 
then drawing the sun at various times of the day), and types of precipitation (e.g., rain, fog, snow, 
sleet, hail; perhaps using a bucket to measure the amount of rain or snow). This will prepare 
them for observing and recording environmental changes that occur in daily and seasonal cycles. 
 
Students should keep track of their activities throughout the week to see what things they do on a 
daily basis (e.g., sleep at night, eat meals, brush their teeth after eating). Discussions should 
describe characteristics about themselves such as sleepy, alert, or hungry as well as their location 
over the course of a day such as bed, kitchen, playground and school. If students have pets, they 
can observe and record the activities of their pets to recognize their daily pattern. They could 
note natural habits and routines, such as when they sleep, as well as habits and routines that are 
established by the care they receive. Students could note the times of the day that the birds come 
to feed at a school or home bird feeder. Do different kinds of birds arrive at different times? 
Birds make excellent subjects to study, since they have daily cycles that are easily observable 
and well known. Many stories relate how a rooster crows at dawn, or how an owl is active at 
night. 
 
Cross Curricular Links 
 
Health:    W-1.1    
Language Arts:    Literacy Place:  
Read Aloud – Bubble Gum, Books, and Bugs- Things to do if you are the 
Snow, Call me Polar Bear, Sailor:  The Hangahore Newfoundland Dog, 
Pipaluk and the Whales 
Mathematics:    N1, N3, SS1 
Social Studies: 
 
Technology:    A4.3,    A4.5,    A4.6, A5.1, A9.5, B8.2, B9.1 
Visual Arts:    CP1.1, CP1.2, CP1.3, RRA1.2 
 
 

42 PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1  
 
 
Science 1  -  Earth and Space Science (ESS) - Daily and Seasonal Changes 
 
Specific Curriculum Outcome 
Students will be expected to... 
ESS – 2 Evaluate the characteristics of the four seasons. 
 
 
 Grade 1 Grade 5 
 ESS – 2 Evaluate the 
characteristics of the four 
seasons. 
 
Weather  
Display the weather data they 
have collected on charts and 
graphs and in their science 
logs. 
 
Achievement Indicators 
     Students who have achieved this outcome should be able to... 
 Contribute to class discussion on changes in weather conditions (e.g., hot/cold, 
warm/cool, more windy/less windy, type of precipitation,...) that occur in daily and 
seasonal cycles.  
 Explain the relationship between weather and seasons (e.g., hot in the summer, snows in 
the winter, rains in the spring) 
 Predict the types of weather for a certain season, based on their observations of the 
patterns of weather during the year   (e.g., length of day, type of precipitation, 
temperature) 
 Sequence or group objects, materials, and events according to one or more attributes 
related to daily and/or seasonal changes (e.g., group pictures by season, sequence 
activities according to time of day, group clothing items by season, and sequence stages 
of garden growth).  
 Explain safety procedures related to dressing appropriately for the weather and why they 
are needed (e.g., wearing hats and mitts in the winter, rain gear when it is raining) 
 
 
 
 
 
  

PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1 43 
 
Elaboration 
Focus Question:  What are the characteristics of the weather during each season? 
Through experience and observation students can make simple weather predictions related to the 
seasons. For example, students could predict what the weather will be like in June or December.  
Throughout the year, students could keep track of the weather on a daily basis and then group 
these records by season in order to make conclusions.   
 
Students could investigate the changes that take place in plants during different seasons. Students 
could observe the leaves and seeds falling from trees in the fall, seeds germinating in the spring, 
and new leaves budding in the spring. They can draw pictures that show how the trees change 
over the seasons or use pictures from print resources. Students could attempt to predict when the 
leaves will fall in autumn, or predict that certain animals will hibernate during the winter. 
 
Students could question workers in their community about how they prepare for the winter. A 
field trip to a farm, zoo, fish plant, fishing village, or other areas that need to prepare for the 
seasons would be a valuable experience. A guest speaker involved in a related industry could 
describe the seasonal preparations that they have to complete. 
 
Students’ behaviours, places visited, and activities vary throughout the year as well. Students can 
collaborate to design posters and murals that illustrate their seasonal activities, dress, and places 
where they like to go. They may even identify foods that they like to eat during different seasons. 
Recess and lunch times that are “outside” days can be used to reinforce the concepts of dressing 
appropriately for the weather. 
 
Students could display pictures of seasonal activities of humans and living things as well as 
weather typical of various seasons. Have students describe their favourite weekly and seasonal 
activities to introduce the concept that the days of the week and the seasons have a sequence, and 
that this sequence is repeated over and over.  
 
 
 
 
Cross Curricular Links 
 
Health: 
 
Language Arts: 
  
Mathematics: 
 
Social Studies:    1.2.2 
Technology:    A5.1,    B5.1    
Visual Arts:    CP1.1, CP1.2, CP1.3, RRA1.2 
 
 