owing in the selection of resources: 
• the use of hands-on activities is an essential learning strategy in all science programs 
• even with the advent of new media, print materials remain a dominant type of resource for  
  science teaching and learning 
• computer soft ware and online resources can offer simulations and models of real-life situations  
  that permit the investigation of phenomena that are not available because of cost, safety, or   
  accessibility 
• resources used in all activities should be appropriate to the grade level 
Technology 
Technology-based resources are essential for instruction in the science classroom. Technology is 
intended to extend our capabilities and, therefore, is one part of the teaching toolkit. Class 
reflection and discussions are required to connect the work with technology to the conceptual 
development, understandings, and activities of the students. Choices to use technology, and 
choices of which technologies to use, should be based on sound pedagogical practices, especially 
those which support student inquiry. Technology should enhance, but not replace, essential 
hands-on science activities. 
 
Some recommended examples of using technologies to support teaching and learning in science 
include: 
 
Data Collection and Analysis 
• Data loggers (e.g., temperature probes, motion detectors) permit students to collect and analyze  
  data in real-time. 
• Databases and spreadsheets can facilitate the analysis and display of student-collected data or  
  data obtained from scientists. 
 
Visualization and Imaging 
• Simulation and modeling soft ware provide opportunities to explore concepts and models  
  which are not readily accessible in the classroom. 
• Students may collect their own digital images and video recordings as part of their data  
  collection and analysis or they may access digital images and video online to help enhance  
  understanding of scientific concepts. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
• Students can use word-processing and presentation tools to share the results of their  
  investigations with others. 

PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1 25 
 
• The Internet can be a means of networking with scientists, teachers, and other students by  
  gathering information and data, posting data and findings, and comparing results with students  
  in different locations. 
 
 
Safety 
Safety in the classroom is of paramount importance. To create a safe classroom requires that a 
teacher be informed, aware, and proactive and that the students listen, think, and respond 
appropriately. Safety cannot be mandated solely by teacher’s rules or school regulations. Safety 
and safe practice are an attitude. 
 
Safe practice in the laboratory is the joint responsibility of the teacher and students. The 
teacher’s responsibility is to provide a safe environment and to ensure the students are aware of 
safe practice. Teachers must also follow the guidelines outlined in the Prince Edward Island 
Science Safety Resource Manual. The students’ responsibility is to act intelligently based on the 
advice which is given and which is available in various resources. 
 
Kwan and Texley (2003) suggest that teachers, as professionals, consider four Ps of safety: 
prepare, plan, prevent, and protect. The following points are adapted from those guidelines and 
provide a starting point for thinking about safety in the science classroom: 
 
Prepare 
• Keep up to date with personal safety  
  knowledge and certifications 
• Be aware of national, provincial, and school  
  level safety policies and guidelines 
• Create a safety contract with students 
 
Plan 
• Develop learning plans that ensure all  
  students learn effectively and safely 
• Choose activities that are best suited to the  
  learning styles, maturity, and behaviour of all 
  students and that include all students 
• Create safety checklists for in-class activities 
  and field studies 
 
 
Prevent 
• Assess and mitigate hazards 
• Review procedures for accident prevention  
  with students 
• Teach and review safety procedures with  
  students, including the need for appropriate  
  clothing 
• Do not use defective or unsafe equipment or 
  procedures 
• Do not allow students to eat or drink in  
  science areas 
Protect 
• Ensure students have sufficient protective  
  devices such as safety glasses 
• Demonstrate and instruct students on the  
  proper use of safety equipment and protective 
  gear 
• Model safe practice by insisting that all  
  students and visitors use appropriate  
  protective devices 
 
 

26 PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1  
 
 
Science and Literacy 
Aside from developing students’ scientific literacy, the outcomes undertaken by students in the 
science curriculum build on, reinforce, and enhance certain aspects of the language arts and 
mathematics curricula. Fostering students’ communication skills is an important part of the 
teachers’ role in the science classroom. Students need to be able to use oral communication, 
reading, writing, and media literacy skills to gain new learning in science and to communicate 
their understanding of what they have learned. 
 
Students’ understanding is revealed through both oral and written communication. Writing in 
science employs special forms and therefore requires specific and direct learning opportunities, 
but it is not necessary for all science learning to involve a written communication component. 
To develop their oral communication skills, students need numerous opportunities to listen to 
information and talk about a range of subjects in science and technology. When reading science 
texts, students use a different set of skills than they do when reading fiction. They need to 
understand vocabulary and terminology that are unique to science, and must be able to interpret 
symbols, charts, and diagrams. To help students construct meaning, it is essential that science 
teachers model and teach the strategies that support learning to read, write, and communicate in 
this subject area. 
 
The Department of Education and Early Childhood Development has materials to support 
literacy instruction across the curriculum. Helpful advice for integrating literacy instruction in 
science and technology may be found in the document Cross-Curriculuar Reading Tools. 
  

PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1 27 
 
Grade 1 Science Specific Curriculum Outcomes 
 
Skills and Process of Science (SP) 
SP – 1  Share their own observations and ideas in a variety of ways 
 
Physical Science (PS) - Materials, Objects and Our Senses 
PS – 1 Describe a wide range of materials using their senses 
PS – 2 Evaluate the suitability of materials for a specific purpose 
PS – 3 Create a model or toy from scrap material 
 
Life Science (LS) - Needs and Characteristics of Living Things 
LS – 1 Distinguish between characteristics that make plants and animals unique  
LS – 2 Classify the characteristics and needs of living things  
 
Earth and Space Science (ESS) - Daily and Seasonal Changes 
ESS – 1 Analyze daily and seasonal changes in the environment 
ESS – 2 Evaluate the characteristics of the four seasons. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

28 PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1  
 
 
Science 1  -  Skills and Process of Science (SP) 
Specific Curriculum Outcome 
Students will be expected to... 
SP – 1  Share their own observations and ideas in a variety of ways 
 
 
Kindergarten Grade 1 Grade 2 
Oral Language – Speaking and 
Listening 
Express feelings and opinions 
and describe personal 
experiences and interests 
SP - 1 Share their own 
observations and ideas in a 
variety of ways 
 
Discuss their ideas and record 
their discoveries in diagrams. 
 
 
Achievement Indicators 
     Students who have achieved this outcome should be able to... 
 Record observations in a variety of written formats (e.g., notes, graphic organizers) 
 Communicate their observations, experiences, and thinking in a variety of ways (e.g., 
verbally, pictorially, graphically, digitally)  
 Describe findings using appropriate/scientific vocabulary (e.g., habitat, absorb, offspring, 
trait, sprout, stem, conservation) 
  
  

PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1 29 
 
Elaboration 
 
Focus Question:  How can we show what we have learned in a variety of ways? 
Throughout this unit, students are encouraged to use their five senses when making observations 
of classroom or visiting pets, and of plants grown in the classroom or out in the school yard. 
Exploration could begin by comparing humans to other animals and then comparing animals to 
plants. 
 
Terms such as legs, wings, ears, roots, and stems could be used to describe living things. A bird 
feeder set up at home or at school would attract various types of birds for students to observe, 
noting their characteristics. Students could collect insects in clear, plastic bottles with holes in 
the lids, and record observations such as the number of wings, legs, and antennae. Students 
should be encouraged to return the insects to their natural environment. These experiences can be 
extended with visits to farms, nature parks, or other settings with live animals and plants. This 
will encourage students to inquire about living things within their immediate environment. Other 
extensions could include exploring living things through the use of print resources, videos, and 
software. 
 
In the classroom, teachers can model recording strategies as they tally information to create 
concrete graphs, picture graphs, and pictographs. This will also make connections with outcomes 
from the Data Management strand in the grade 1 mathematics program. For example, students 
could use pictures of chickens, pigs, and cows to make a picture graph of the number of animals 
at a farm they visited. They could use nonstandard units of measuring, such as “longer stem” or 
“shorter ears”. They could make a concrete graph using themselves to illustrate the number of 
students in the class with certain eye colours. This could be done with one half of the class at a 
time so that the other half can see the graph. 
 
 
Cross Curricular Links 
 
Health: 
 
Language Arts: 
 
Mathematics:    N1, N2, N3, N4, N5, SS1 
Social Studies:    Throughout all Outcomes 
Technology:    A4.3,    A4.4,    A4.5, A5.1, A9.1, B9.1 
Visual Arts:    CP1.1, CP1.3, RRA1.2 
 
 
 
 
 

30 PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1  
 
 
Science 1  -  Physical Science (PS) - Materials, Objects and Our Senses 
Specific Curriculum Outcome 
Students will be expected to... 
PS1 – Describe a wide range of materials using their senses 
 
 
Kindergarten Grade 1 Grade 4 
Exploring the World Using 
Our Senses 
Become aware of the five 
senses. 
PS1 – Describe a wide range 
of materials using their senses 
 
Light and Sound 
Perform a number of 
investigations that examine 
sight and hearing. 
 
Achievement Indicators 
     Students who have achieved this outcome should be able to... 
 Identify each of the five senses and associate those senses with parts of humans or other 
animals 
 Identify characteristics used to describe the range of observations related to each sense 
(such as: smooth, rough, bright, dull, sour, sweet, loud, quiet...)   
 Recognize how each of the senses helps us to identify, describe, and safely use materials, 
and recognize potential dangers in the environment   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 

PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1 31 
 
Elaboration 
Focus Question:  How do we use our senses to make sense of our world? 
Observation using all of the senses is one of the foundations of scientific exploration. Through 
hands-on activities students will identify and describe the main body parts with which the five 
senses are associated.  Students will also investigate how each of the senses help to keep us safe 
as we recognize dangers in the environment. Teachers can emphasize safety precautions for 
using their senses (e.g., the use of safety goggles, wafting techniques for smelling materials, 
tasting only when given permission, not touching hot objects or corrosive materials). 
 
Caution: Before doing any activity involving foods or scents, students with allergies should 
be identified. Show students how to waft odours towards their noses as a safe technique for 
smelling unknown materials. 
 
Students will be familiar with relying on their sense of sight for making most observations, and 
may not realize how much they can sense without the use of their eyes. Once students are 
making observations using all of their senses, every classroom or outside experience can be used 
as an opportunity to practice making observations.  Students could go on a field trip or a walk 
around the school grounds to explore using their senses. Students could draw pictures of things 
they hear, touch, smell, and see. Try playing “I Spy”, with a senses twist: “I Hear”, “I Feel”, “I 
Smell” or “I Taste”.  
 
This outcome can be reinforced in the Daily and Seasonal Changes unit, as students use their 
senses to describe the changes that occur from one season to the next. For example, in autumn 
they see the leaves changing colour and they feel the dryness of the fallen leaves. Students could 
try to identify and describe objects without the use of one or more of their senses. For example, 
have students identify objects while blindfolded, with mittens on, with their ears covered, or with 
their nose pinched. Students could explore paper bags containing several objects of different 
sizes, shapes, and textures and identify the objects using their sense of touch. Record 
observations of various environments (e.g., classroom, gymnasium, school yard, library, and 
cafeteria) using all of their senses.  
Cross Curricular Links 
 
Health:    W-1.4, W-1.6, W-1.8, W-1.9, L-1.2 
Relationship Choices: Some Kids are Deaf 
                                     Some Kids are Blind 
Poisons Make you Sick 
Language Arts:    Literacy Place: Shared Reading – Making Ice Cream 
                         Read Aloud – Bubblegum, Books, and Bugs  
                                                       – Cinnamon Toast 
Mathematics:    PR1,    PR2,        
The Warlord’s Puzzle, The Dragon’s Scales 
Social Studies:    1.2.1, 1.2.2 
Technology:    A5.1    
Visual Arts:    FC1.1, CP1.3, RRA1.2 
 

32 PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1  
 
 
Science 1  -  Physical Science (PS) - Materials, Objects and Our Senses 
Specific Curriculum Outcome 
Students will be expected to... 
PS-2  Evaluate the suitability of materials for a specific purpose 
 
 
Kindergarten Grade 1 Grade 3 
Express ideas and feelings 
creatively through artistic 
expression. 
PS-2  Evaluate the suitability 
of materials for a specific 
purpose 
 
Materials and Structures 
Build structures using various 
materials and test their 
strength and suitability. 
 
Achievement Indicators 
     Students who have achieved this outcome should be able to... 
 Describe characteristics of materials using their sensory observations as well as 
technologies, such as hand lenses, cameras, and microphones, which enhance the senses  
 
 Predict the characteristics (e.g., hardness, insulating ability, water resistance, absorbency, 
and flexibility) of common materials and carry out a procedure to test those predictions  
 Distinguish between the materials used to construct an object and the object itself 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1 33 
 
 
Elaboration 
Focus Question:  Why are specific materials chosen to build specific objects? 
Through exploration students will use their senses to examine objects and the materials that are 
used to construct those objects.  Students will learn that materials used to construct objects are 
chosen because of the specific characteristics the materials possess.  The understanding of these 
characteristics will assist students in the construction of their own object in outcome PS – 3. 
 
Students can make observations using their senses to name and describe various parts of familiar 
objects (e.g., the legs of a chair, windows in a house, eraser on a pencil). Students could collect 
and display a variety of similar objects that are made of different materials: 
 
 writing instruments 
 shoes  containers 
 books/magazines  leaves  musical instruments 
 
 
Through exploratory activities, students will investigate the properties of materials; they will do 
this naturally by bending, stretching, rolling, and smelling the materials. Encourage students to 
describe what they are observing as they explore the various materials and make predictions 
about similar materials. This should lead to discussions about the type of objects that could be 
made from a material with the determined properties. For example, students can suggest which 
materials would be appropriate for building a bridge, a house, a bowl, or a swing. Literature can 
be used as a context. Students may try to predict which material would be the best to build a 
fence in Grandpa’s Garden, or to make a beak in, A Wild Eagle Needs a Beak. 
 
Students will start to look more closely at various types of materials, the different forms they can 
take, and their properties.  Through their explorations, students should come to the understanding 
that constructed objects are made from a variety of materials depending on the purpose of the 
object. 
 
 
Cross Curricular Links 
 
Health: 
 
Language Arts:    Literacy Place: Guided Reading – Grandpa’s Garden, A Wild Eagle 
Needs a Beak 
Mathematics:    SS1    
The Warlord’s Puzzle 
Social Studies:    1.2.1 
Technology:    A3.1,    A3.2,    B3.1    
Visual Arts:    CP1.4 
 
 
 

34 PEI Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: Science Curriculum Grade 1  
 
 
 
 
 Science 1  -  Physical Science (PS) - Materials, Objects and Our Senses 
Specific Curriculum Outcome 
Students will be expected to... 
PS – 3  Create a model or toy from scrap material 
 
 
Kindergarten 
Grade 1 Grade 3 
Geometry 
Build and describe 3-D objects 
PS – 3  Create a model or toy 
from scrap material 
 
Materials and Structures 
Build structures using various 
materials and test their 
strength and suitability. 
 
Achievement Indicators 
     Students who have achieved this outcome should