group  andcompromising,  debating,  andorganizing,  planning,  making
interpersonalnegotiating  to  resolve  conflictsdecisions,  and  taking  action  in
communications  suchand  differencesgroup  settings
as  debating,•contribute  to  developing  a
negotiating,supportive  climate  in  groups
establishing  a
consensus,
classifying,  and
mediating  conflict

85ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
 APPENDICES
Process  Inquiry
SkillCritical  Responsibilities  forShared  Responsibilities
Social  Studies
Frame  questions  or•identify  relevant  primary  and•  identify  relevant  factual  material
hypotheses  that  givesecondary  sources•  identify  relationship  between  items
clear focus to an•  identify  relationships  between  itemsof factual  information
inquiryof historical,  geographic,  and•  group  data  in  categories  according
economic  informationto  appropriate  criteria
•  combine  critical  social  studies•  combine  critical  concepts  into
concepts  into  statements  ofstatement  of  conclusions  based  on
conclusion  based  on  informationinformation
•  restate  major  ideas  in  concise  form
•  form  opinion  based  on  critical
examination  of  relevant  information
•  state  hypothesis  for  further  study
Solve  problems(see  shared  responsibilities)•identify  a  situation  in  which  a
creatively  anddecision  is  required
critically•secure  factual  information  needed
to  make  the  decision
•  recognize  the  values  implicit  in  the
situation,  and  the  issues  that  flow
from  them
•  identify  alternative  courses  of  action
and  predict  likely  consequences  of
each
•  make  decision  based  on  data
obtained
•  select  an  appropriate  strategy  to
solve  a  problem
•  self-monitor  decision-making
process
Apply  a  variety  of•determine  the  accuracy  and•  determine  the  accuracy  and
thinking  skills  andreliability  of  primary  and  secondaryreliability  of  data
strategiessources  of  geographic  data•  make  inferences  from  factual
•  make  inferences  from  primary  andmaterial
secondary  materials•recognize  inconsistencies  in  a  line
•  arrange  related  events  and  ideasof  argument
in  chronological  order•  determine  whether  the  information
is  pertinent  to  the  subject

86
ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
 APPENDICES
SkillCritical  Responsibilities  forShared  Responsibilities
Social  Studies
Recognize  significant•research  to  determine  the  multiple•review  an  interpretation  from
issues  and  perspectivesperspectives  on  an  issuevarious  perspectives
in an area of inquiry•  examine  critically  relationships
among  elements  of  an  issue/topic
•  examine  and  assess  a  variety  of
viewpoints  on  issues  before  forming
an  opinion
Identify  sources•identify  an  inclusive  range•  identify  and  evaluate  sources  of
of  informationof  sourcesprint
relevant•use  library  catalogue  to  locate  sources
to  the  inquiry•  use  search  engine  to  locate  sources
on  World  Wide  Web
•  use  periodical  index
Gather,  record,•  interpret  history  through  artifacts•use  a  variety  of  information  sources
evaluate,  and•use  sources  of  information  in  the•  conduct  interviews  with  individuals
synthesizecommunity•analyse  evidence  by  selecting,
information•access  oral  history  includingcomparing,  and  categorizing
interviewsinformation
•  use  map  and  globe  reading  skills
•  interpret  pictures,  charts,  graphs,
photographs,  tables,  and  other
visuals
•  organize  and  record  information
using  time  lines
•  distinguish  between  primary  and
secondary  sources
•  identify  the  limitations  of  primary
and  secondary  sources
•  detect  bias  in  primary  and
secondary  sources
Interpret  meaning•interpret  the  socio-economic•identify  ambiguities  and
and  the  significanceand  political  messages  ofinconsistencies  in  an  argument
of  information  andcartoons  and  other  visuals•identify  stated  and  unstated
arguments•interpret  the  socio-economicassumptions
and  political  messages  of
artistic  expressions  (e.g.,  poetry,
literature,  folk  songs,  plays)
Analyze  and  evaluate•distinguish  among  hypotheses,•estimate  the  adequacy  of
information  forevidence,  and  generalizationsinformation
logic  and  bias•distinguish  between  fact  and  fiction,•  distinguish  between  relevant  and
and  fact  and  opinionirrelevant  information

87ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
 APPENDICES
SkillCritical  Responsibilities  forShared  Responsibilities
Social  Studies
Test  data,•   compare  and  contrast  credibility•test  the  validity  of  information
interpretations,of differing  accounts  of  same  eventusing  such  criteria  as  source,
conclusions,  and•recognize  the  value  andobjectivity,  technical  correctness,
arguments  forsignificance  of  interpreting  factualcurrency
accuracy  and  validitymaterial•apply  appropriate  models  such  as
•   recognize  changing  societal  values’diagrams,  webs,  concept  maps,
effects  on  the  interpretation  ofand  flow  charts  to  analyse  data
historical  events•  state  relationships  among
categories  of  information
Draw  conclusions(see  shared  responsibilities)•  recognize  the  tentative  nature  of
that  are  supported  byconclusions
the  evidence•  recognize  that  values  may  influence
conclusions  or  interpretations
Make  effective•access,  gather,  synthesize,  and  provide
decisions  asrelevant  information  and  ideas  about
consumers,economic  issues
producers,  savers,•generate  new  ideas,  approaches,  and
investors,  andpossibilities  in  making  economic
citizensdecisions
•   identify  what  they  gain  and  what  they
give  up  when  they  make  economic
choices
•   use  economic  data  to  make  predictions
about  the  future
  Process:  Participation
SkillCritical  Responsibilities  forShared  Responsibilities
Social  Studies
Engage  in  a  variety(see  shared  responsibility)•express  personal  convictions
of  learning•  communicate  own  beliefs,
experiences  thatfeelings,  and  convictions
include  both•adjust  own  behaviour  to  fit  the
independent  studydynamics  of  various  groups  and
and  collaborationsituations
•  recognize  human  beings’  mutual
relationship  in  satisfying  one
another’s  needs
•  reflect  upon,  assess,  and  enrich
their  learning  process

88
ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
 APPENDICES
SkillCritical  Responsibilities  forShared  Responsibilities
Social  Studies
Function  in  a(see  shared  responsibilities)•contribute  to  development  of  a
variety  of  groupings,supportive  climate  in  groups
using  collaborative•serve as a leader or follower
and  co-operative•   assist  in  setting  goals  for  the
skills  and  strategiesgroup
•   participate  in  making  rules  and
guidelines  for  group  life
•   participate  in  delegating  duties,
organizing,  planning,  making
decisions,  and  taking  actions  in
group  settings
•   participate  in  persuading,
compromising,  debating,  and
negotiating  to  resolve  conflicts  and
differences
•   use  appropriate  conflict  resolution
and  mediation  skills
•   relate  to  others  in  peaceful,
respectful,  and  non-discriminatory
ways
Respond  to  class,•  keep  informed  on  issues  that  affect
school,  community,society
or  national  public•  identify  situations  in  which  social
issuesaction  is  required
•  work  individually  or  with  others  to
decide  on  an  appropriate  course  of
action
•  accept  and  fulfil  responsibilities
associated  with  citizenship
•  articulate  personal  beliefs,  values,
and  world  views  with  respect  to  given
issues
•  debate  differing  points  of  view  regarding
an  issue
•  clarify  preferred  futures  as  a  guide  to
present  actions
Relate  to  the•  recognize  the  economic  factors•develop  the  personal  commitment
environment  inassociated  with  sustainability  (see  sharednecessary  for  responsible
sustainable  ways  andresponsibilities)community  involvement
promote  sustainable•identify  ways  in  which  governments  can•   employ decision-making  skills
practices  on  a  local,affect  sustainability  practices•contribute  to  community  service
regional,  national,or  environmental  projects  in
and  global  levelschools  and  communities,  or  both
•   promote  sustainable  practices  in
families,  schools,  and  communities
•   self-monitor  contributions

89ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
 APPENDICES
The  social  studies  program  draws  from  many  disciplines  to  achieve  its  goals.
Social  studies  is  firmly  grounded  in  history,  geography,  and  economics.  While
these  disciplines  are  the  mainstay,  there  has  been  extensive  borrowing  of  ideas,
materials,  and  techniques  from  other  fields.  Knowledge  from  other  disciplines
within  the  social  sciences  (political  science  or  government,  sociology,  anthro-
pology,  and  social  psychology)  and  from  the  humanities  (literature,  the  arts,
religion,  and  law)  are  viewed  as  equally  capable  of  contributing  to  the  solution
of  human  and  societal  problems  and  thus  are  seen  as  vital  elements  of  the  entire
social  studies  curriculum.  This  curriculum  guide  promotes  history,  geography,
and  economics  as  the  three  major  disciplines  in  social  studies  since  they
directly  promote  the  development  of  temporal  and  spatial  competencies,  and
sustainable  living.
History  brings  to  the  field  a  framework  and  mind-set  drawn  largely  from
literary  and  humanistic  traditions  that  encourage  analysis  and  discussion  of
story  lines,  characters,  and  context  in  a  fashion  specific  to  time  and  place  that
may  or  may  not  promote  generalizing.  Most  historians  seek  to  develop  carefully
drawn  descriptions  of  a  time  period,  event,  or  personality  based  primarily  on
contemporary  accounts,  statistics,  and/or  artifacts.  History  provides  social
studies  with  the  key  concepts  of  chronology,  continuity,  change,  cause  and
effect,  bias,  exploration,  colonization,  and  civilization.
The  fundamental  themes  of  geography  include  location,  place,  relationships
within  places,  movement,  and  regions.  Geography  examines  the  interaction  of
humans  within  their  spatial  environments,  and  the  effects  on  the  location  and
development  of  place  and  region.  The  study  of  geography  is  focussed  on
answering  four  primary  questions:  Where  is  it?  Why  is  it  there?  How  is  it
organized?  Why  is  that  significant?  The  key  concepts  of  geography  promoted  in
the  social  studies  curriculum  include  landforms,  urbanization,  habitat,  spatial
interaction,  region,  location,  diffusion,  population  density,  ecosystem,  climate,
demographics,  migration,  resources,  and  sustainable  economic  development.
Economics  is  the  study  of  how  we  use  resources  to  satisfy  needs  and  wants.
Economics  provides  the  knowledge  and  skills  necessary  to  make  personal
economic  decisions  and  to  participate  in  the  process  of  societal  economic
decision  making.  The  study  of  economic  concepts,  principles,  and  systems
develops  the  understanding  of  how  economic  decisions  affect  individuals  and
societies.  Economics  supports  such  key  concepts  as  scarcity,  production,
distribution,  consumption,  opportunity,  cost,  price,  supply,  demand,  needs
and  wants,  productivity,  goods  and  services,  money,  economic  institutions,  and
enterprise.  Economics  contributes  to  other  fields  of  study,  such  as  political
science,  anthropology,  sociology,  and  social  psychology,  which  are  essential  to
the  understandings  and  competencies  of  social  studies.
Appendix C: Disciplines of Social Studies

90
ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
 APPENDICES
Political  science  is  the  study  of  how  we  attempt  to  establish  and  maintain
order  in  society  by  investigating  relationships  between  power  and  those
subjected  to  it.  It  contributes  such  key  concepts  as  government,  federalism,
nation,  province,  parliament,  legislative  assembly,  senate,  monarchy,
bureaucracy,  republic,  citizenship,  judiciary,  rule  of  law,  and  due  process.
Anthropology  is  the  study  of  culture,  how  it  is  established  and  how  it
functions.  Anthropological  concepts  of  importance  to  social  studies  include
culture,  archaeology,  cultural  diffusion,  language,  ethnology,  acculturation,
ritual,  tradition,  customers,  innovation,  and  artifacts.
Sociology  is  the  study  of  groups  and  how  they  function.  Sociology  contrib-
utes  such  key  concepts  as  groups,  socialization,  society,  social  status,  social
class,  social  roles,  social  mobility,  segregation,  role  expectations,  stratifica-
tion,  family,  norms,  and  power.
Social  psychology  is  the  study  of  group  behaviour.  Social  psychology  exposes
the  learner  to  such  concepts  as  learning,  achievement,  self-concept,
behaviour,  attitudes,  personality,  perception,  motives,  aggression,  habits,
traits,  instinct,  conditioning,  reinforcement,  and  punishment.
The  humanities  reflect  our  increasing  effort  to  make  moral,  philosophical,
and  ethical  sense  of  the  world.  A  society  without  ethical  standards  seriously
undermines  the  values  widely  regarded  as  providing  the  optimum  social
framework.  History,  literature,  drama,  art,  philosophy,  and  music  (the
traditional  humanities)  express  and  preserve  the  wisdom  of  courageous  men
and  women.  For  writers,  artists,  and  spiritual  leaders,  the  humanities
represent  a  landscape  in  which  human  potential  can  be  explored.  For
scientists  and  social  scientists,  the  humanities  provide  a  structure  of
accountability  for  the  consequences  of  the  knowledge  they  create.  At  this
stage  of  human  development,  when  a  lack  of  moral  judgment  can  lead  to
global  destruction,  it  is  imperative  that  society  use  ethical  standards  to  guide
the  use  of  scientific  advances  so  that  knowledge  may  be  used  for  human
betterment  and  not  for  destruction.
The  utilization  of  these  disciplines  provides  educators  with  a  great  deal  of
flexibility  in  selecting  content  (based  on  the  needs  of  the  learner  and  the
nature  of  society)  and  in  promoting  different  methods  of  learning.  The  guide
neither  espouses  nor  anticipates  a  discipline-by-discipline  approach  to  the
social  studies,  but  rather  envisions  and  advocates  their  integration  in  an
interdisciplinary  approach.  The  courses  at  each  grade  level  are  designed  to
reflect  a  careful,  judicious,  rich  blending  of  the  various  disciplines  of  the
social  studies  program  so  that  students  may  benefit  from  the  rich  and  diverse
sources  of  knowledge  that  are  available.

91ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
 APPENDICES
Appendix D: Glossary of Terminology and
Teaching Structures
Mapping  Terms
Scale  -  language  used  to  describe  the  representative  size/distance  of
objects  relative  to  the  real  objects  (e.g.,  a  small  toy  bus  used  to  represent
a  real  bus  in  a  model/drawing).
Pictorial  Map  -  a  map  that  portrays  its  features  as  drawings  and  pictures.
Positional  Language  -  language  used  to  describe  the  location  of  an  object.
Economic  Terms
Goods  -  an  economic  term  used  to  describe  products  that  satisfy  a  market
need  or  are  involved  in  trade  (items  that  people  buy  or  trade).
Services  -  an  economic  term  used  to  describe  work  done  for  others  (work
other  people  are  paid  to  do  for  you).
Need  -  something  that  is  necessary  for  survival,  such  as  food,  clothing,
shelter,  love,  and  belonging.
Want  -  something  that  a  person  desires/wishes,  such  as  a  toy  or  trip,  but
which  is  not  necessary  for  survival.
Paid  -  working  for  pay.
Unpaid  -  working  without  pay.
Volunteer  -  person  who  works  willingly  without  pay.
Environmental  Terms
Natural  Feature  -  a  naturally  occurring  feature  in  nature  (e.g.,  tree,  grass,
sand,  mountain,  water,  fish).
Constructed  Feature  -  a  constucted  feature  in  our  environment  that  is
built  by  people  (e.g.,  house,  paved  road,  playground  equipment).
Writing  Genres
Word  Splash  -  a  collection  of  words  used  to  introduce  students  to
vocabulary  and  concepts.  Students  categorize  and  find  relationships
among  the  words.

92
ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
 APPENDICES
Accordian (fold) book - a book formed from a single sheet of paper
folded  into  three  equal  parts.
Other  Terms
Rights  -  things  that  all  people  need  to  live  or  need  to  be  able  to  do.
Responsibilities  -  things  that  people  must  answer  for.
Cultural  Group  -  a  human-made  system  built  by  a  group  of  people
and  passed  on  from  generation  to  generation  (e.g.,  food,  music,
language,  religion).
Social  Group  -  a  group  of  people  sharing  some  social  connection
(e.g.,  friends,  community,  club).
Time  line  -  a  visual  used  to  show  how  related  events  are  arranged  in
chronological  order.

93ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
 APPENDICES
Appendix E: Journey On Grade 1 E-mail
Buddies Lesson Plan
Outcomes
Technologies:  A2.1,  B2.1,  E2.1,
E2.2,  E2.3,  E2.8
Language  Arts:  (Emergent)  2.1,  2.3,
5.1,  8.1,  8.2;  (Early)  10.4
Health:  Life  Learning  Choices
Outcome  L-1.2
Activity
Schools  are  making  extensive  use  of  the  buddy  system  where  a
student  from  a  higher  grade  becomes  a  mentor  for  a  student  in  a
lower  grade.  In  this  activity,  a  student  from  one  of  the  higher
grades  sends  a  message  or  story  to  a  student  in  grade  1.  Once  the
message  has  been  sent  by  e-mail,  the  older  buddy  assists  the
younger  student  with  retrieving  the  e-mail  and  reading  the
message.  A  good  activity  that  encourages  collaboration  and  co-
operative  learning,  this  exercise  exposes  the  younger  students  to
the  concept  of  communicating  with  technology  and  gives  the  older
students  time  to  reinforce  their  skills.
Resources
•E-mail  access
Instructions
1.The  message  sent  by  the  older  buddy  could  take  many
forms.  It  can  be  a  message  about  a  personal  experience,  a
short  story  which  the  older  student  has  written,  or
discussion  about  a  book  that  they  have  read  together.
2.The  older  student  can  help  the  younger  student  login  to
their  account,  access  the  e-mail  software,  and  then  read  the
message  that  was  sent  to  the  younger  student.
3.If  desired,  the  younger  student,  with  the  help  of  the  buddy,
could  formulate  and  send  a  reply.

94
ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
 APPENDICES