a, 
United States; red is associated 
with stopping [traffi c lights] 
in PEI, Canada and United 
States, luck in China, success in 
Cherokee culture, mourning in 
South Africa)
Students are expected to
•     demonstrate an awareness 
of the meaning of signs and 
symbols encountered in their 
daily lives and in works of art 
(RRA2.3)
(e.g., symbols and shapes 
related to school, travel, and 
the arts; sports or institutional 
logos; symbols from art works 
or heritage crafts of family or 
community signifi cance)
Students are expected to
•     demonstrate an awareness 
of the meaning of signs and 
symbols encountered in their 
daily lives and in works of art 
(RRA3.3)
(e.g., fonts or logos that remind 
them of specifi c companies, 
messages, or moods; the meaning 
of animals such as the orca in 
Aboriginal clan symbols or the 
Inukshuk in Aboriginal art)
•     identify and document their 
strengths, their interests, and 
areas for improvement as 
creators of art (RRA1.4)
(e.g., discuss what they think is 
good about works in their art 
folder during conferences with 
their teacher; do a think-pair-
share on their favourite part of 
one of the art works)
•     identify and document their 
strengths, their interests, and 
areas for improvement as 
creators of art (RRA2.4)
(e.g., identify what is interesting 
about a work they have produced; 
identify what they feel they 
have done well and what they 
would do differently next time to 
improve)
•     identify and document their 
strengths, their interests, and 
areas for improvement as 
creators of art (RRA3.4)
(e.g., keep an art journal to 
record what they have done well 
in their art works, or learned 
about in their art works, as they 
complete them; use the strategy 
of matching word and image to 
share their feelings about an art 
work or its creation)

52
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
OVERVIEW FOR GRADES 1-3
* Please note: In kindergarten, children are provided with opportunities that can be found in the Kindergarten 
Curriculum Document.
Strand Four: Exploring Forms and Cultural Contexts: (EC)
Demonstrate an understanding of a variety of art forms, styles, and techniques from the past and 
present, and their social and/or community contexts.
Grade 1Grade 2Grade 3
Students are expected to
•     identify and describe a variety 
of visual art forms they see in 
their home, at school, in the 
community, and in visual arts 
experiences (EC1.1)
(e.g., illustrations in picture 
books, designs of various toys, 
patterns on clothing or other 
textiles, classroom visits by artists, 
student displays at their school, 
visits to galleries) 
Students are expected to
•     identify and describe a wide 
variety of visual art forms they 
see in their home, at school, in 
the community, and in visual 
arts experience (EC2.1)
(e.g., design of everyday 
items; picture books; artists-
in-education; community art 
works, such as public sculpture, 
architecture, and murals; 
Aboriginal designs in dancing 
regalia; art works in student art 
exhibitions and community art 
festivals)
Students are expected to
•     identify and describe a variety 
of visual art forms they see in 
their home, at school, in the 
community, and in visual arts 
experiences (EC3.1)
(e.g., original paintings at a 
community gallery, sculptures in 
a local park, art reproductions 
in offi ces, murals and sculptural 
monuments in the community, 
mixed media art works at arts 
festivals)
•     demonstrate an awareness of 
a variety of works of art and 
artistic traditions from diverse 
communities, times, and places 
(EC1.2)
(e.g., iconic architecture they 
have seen either in pictures or 
in real life, such as the Province 
House, the Eiffel Tower, the Taj 
Mahal; comics from different 
countries; decorations or patterns 
on crafts or old artefacts; 
contemporary and ancient clay 
sculptures; paintings of family or 
community events from different 
cultures or from previous eras) 
•     demonstrate an awareness of 
a variety of works of art and 
artistic traditions from diverse 
communities, times, and places 
(EC2.2)
(e.g., depictions of nature, of 
people doing things together, or 
of people at work; miniature 
paintings from India; Aboriginal 
textiles, ceramics, and 
petroglyphs; contemporary Inuit 
drawings of life in the North by 
Annie Pootoogook) 
•     demonstrate an awareness of 
a variety of works of art and 
artistic traditions from diverse 
communities, times, and places 
(EC3.2)
(e.g.,  a picture book that tells a 
story about people and the time 
and place in which they work, 
play, and build their community; 
George Littlechild’s book This 
Land Is My Land; Daphne 
Odjig’s historical mural The 
Indian in Transition; Jacob 
Lawrence’s paintings of African-
Americans working, playing, 
and interacting; classical Greek 
sculptures of sports fi gures, and 
contemporary sports sculptures, 
such as the fans in Michael 
Snow’s The Audience)

53
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1

54
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1

55
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1

56
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
OVERVIEW FOR GRADES 1-3
Teacher Notes
•     The recommended instructional time for elementary visual arts in grades 1-3 is 5% (15 minutes/
day, 75 minutes/week, 90 minutes/ 6- day cycle, or 46.25 hours/year).
• Teachers may wish to utilize an integrated approach to have students achieve visual arts outcomes. 
This approach provides a practical means for teachers to connect outcomes in meaningful ways. 
By identifying connections between similar concepts and skills shared by several subject areas, 
teachers may more directly address curriculum outcomes within classroom instruction.
•     Colour coding for the four strands are as follows:
         -  Red - Strand One: Fundamental Concepts
         -  Yellow-Strand Two: Creating and Presenting
         -  Green - Strand Three: Refl ecting, Responding, and Analysing
         -  Blue- Strand Four: Exploration of Forms and Cultural Context
•     Resources: Explorations in Art 1: Teacher’s wrap-around edition and Fine Arts and Studio 
Process, CD Rom.
The following are art supplies to consider for a successful art program. 
(Please note that in some cases some of these supplies may be part of the student’s purchasing list, such as 
scissors, pencils, and art journal book.):
paint: liquid tempera (yellow, cyan, magenta, black, white, brown, red, purple, green, orange)
block paints: yellow, cyan, magenta, black, white, brown, red, purple, green, orange
variety of brushes: 3/4 fl at, 3/4 round, 1/4 fl at, 1/4 round
scissors     pencils (H2 B6)    sponges   
rulers                                                    crayons                                                    coloured             pencils
newsprint                                       construction             paper                          manilla             paper
mural paper   coloured tissue paper  bristol board (for art portfolio)
masking tape  modeling clay       glue (stick, liquid)
plasticine                                       string                                                    journal
sketch             pad                                       erasers                                                    
oil pastels (set of various colours and set of black) 
Recycled and gathered materials to consider for a successful art program:
found             objects                          natural             materials                                       tissue             rolls
yarn                                                    cardboard                                       seeds
beads                                                    fabric                                                    pipe             cleaners
magazines                                       tin             foil                                                    coloured             mylar
sticks and wooden rods   thread/ spool   paper bags
egg cartons    styro foam trays    ice cream/yogurt    
straws                                                    toothpicks                                       containers
stir             sticks                                       ribbon                                                    rubberbands
buttons                                                    laces                                                    sequins                                       
    
•     Glossary: Please note that italicized words may be found in the glossary of Explorations In Art 1.
•     Words that are italicized with a * may be found in the appendix of this document.

57
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE  1
Grade 1
Specifi c Curriculum Outcomes

58
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1



60
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1

61
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
STRAND ONE: FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
Strand One: Fundamental Concepts (FC)
Develop an understanding of the following concepts through participation in a variety of hands-on, 
open-ended visual arts experiences.
Grade 1
Students are expected to
•     develop an understanding of the elements and principles of art and design (FC1.1)
Elements of Art and Design:
•     line: jagged, curved, broken, dashed, spiral, straight, wavy, zigzag lines; lines in art and everyday objects 
(natural and human-made)
•     shape and form: geometric and organic shapes and forms of familiar objects (e.g., geometric: circles, blocks; 
organic: clouds, fl owers)
•     space: depiction of objects in the distance as smaller and closer to the top of the art paper; shapes and lines 
closer together or far apart; horizon lines; spaces through, inside, and around shapes and objects
•     colour:     mixing of primary colours (red, yellow, blue); identifi cation of warm (e.g., red, orange, yellow) and 
cool (e.g., blue, green, purple)
•     texture: textures of familiar objects (e.g., fuzzy, prickly, bumpy, smooth); changes in texture; a pattern of 
lines to show texture (e.g., the texture of a snake’s skin); transfer of texture (e.g., placing a piece of paper 
over a textured surface and then rubbing the paper with wax crayon)
•     value: light, dark
Principles of Art and Design
Students will develop understanding of all principles of design (that is, contrast, repetition and rhythm, variety, 
emphasis, proportion, balance, unity and harmony, and movement), but the focus in grade one will be on contrast.
•     contrast: light/dark; large/small; pure/mixed colours

62
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
Outcomes
Elaborations-Strategies for Learning and Teaching
Develop an understanding of the following concepts through participation in a variety of hands-on, open-
ended visual arts experiences.
Students are expected to
STRAND ONE: FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
•     develop an understanding of the  
elements and principles of art  
and design in creating and      
viewing art work (FC1.1)
Throughout the school year, grade one students will explore, experiment, 
identify, and demonstrate a basic understanding of the elements and 
principles of art and design when creating and viewing art work. They 
will build upon, expand, and refi ne their knowledge of the elements 
and principles from the kindergarten  level. Students will be expected to 
identify, articulate, and use the elements and principles of art and design 
with the following level (degree) of understanding.
Elements of Art and Design:
Students will develop an understanding of all elements of art and design:
•     line: jagged, curved, broken, dashed, spiral, straight, wavy, zigzag 
lines; lines in art and everyday objects (natural and human-made)
•     shape and form: geometric and organic shapes and forms of familiar 
objects (e.g., geometric: circles, blocks; organic: clouds, fl owers)
•     space: depiction of objects in the distance as smaller and closer to 
the top of the art paper; shapes and lines closer together or far apart; 
horizon lines; spaces through, inside, and around shapes and objects
•     colour:     mixing of primary colours (red, yellow, blue); identifi cation 
of warm (e.g., red, orange, yellow) and cool (e.g., blue, green, purple)
•     texture: textures of familiar objects (e.g., fuzzy, prickly, bumpy, 
smooth); changes in texture; a pattern of lines to show texture (e.g., 
the texture of a snake’s skin); transfer of texture (e.g., placing a piece 
of paper over a textured surface and then rubbing the paper with wax 
crayon)
•     value: light, dark
Principles of Art and Design
Students will develop understanding of all principles of design (that 
is, contrast, repetition and rhythm, variety, emphasis, proportion, balance, 
unity and harmony, and movement), but the focus in grade one will be on 
contrast.
•     contrast: light/dark; large/small; pure/mixed colours; near/far

63
PEI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT: VISUAL ARTS CURRICULUM, GRADE 1
Tasks for Instruction and/or Assessment
Resources/Notes
Develop an understanding of the following concepts through participation in a variety of hands-on, open-
ended visual arts experiences.
STRAND ONE: FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
Performance
•     Use a variety of lines, such as jagged, curved, broken, dashed, spiral, 
straight, wavy, zigzag in your image to create the feeling of a storm or 
the texture of an animal. You can explore lines through media, such as 
crayons, oil pastels, paint, printmaking, clay, or mixed media. Share 
your image with the class. Refl ect in your art journal on how you 
created and used the element line.
•     Look     for     geometric and organic shapes and forms in nature and human-
made environments. Have you ever seen these types of shapes and forms 
used by artists? Do you use these geometric and organic shapes in your 
art work? Create an image(s) using geometric and organic shapes and 
forms. Share them with your class by displaying them in your classroom 
or hallway. Discuss your art work with your classmates.
Journal
•     Create a picture that shows fi gures and objects far away. Now add 
fi gures or objects that appear near. Describe how you did this. Record 
your fi ndings in your art journal.
Interview
•     At different times of the year your teacher and you will discuss how you 
used the elements and principles of art and design in the art work kept 
in your *art portfolio.
Paper and Pencil
•     Imagine you are a scientist exploring colours. Mix the primary colours. 
What colours did you create? How did you do this? Record this in your 
art journal. Then use these colours to paint a picture. Write a story about 
the image you created. After you have written your story describe how 
your colours helped to tell your story.
Presentation
•     Create the texture of an animal that is furry. You can use lines, shapes, 
and colours to create your texture. Describe the lines, shapes, and colours 
you used to create your pattern. Present your image to the class.
Portfolio
•     Keep a record of your art work in your portfolio. S