nts  time  to  explore  the  globe/
map,  noting  title,  signs,  symbols  (colour  and  shape  of  land/
water),  and  legend  (used  to  locate  items  on  the  globe/map).
(Teachers  may  wish  to  use  this  as  an  opportunity  to  review  the
importance  of  the  land/water  from  outcome  1.2.2.)
•Engage  students  with  an  appropriate  book  as  a  read  aloud.  The
selected  book  should  describe  a  trip.  As  the  story  is  read,  draw
attention  to  words  used  to  describe  places,  location,  landmarks,
and  directions.  After  reading  the  book,  invite  student  pairs  to
create  a  model  or  pictorial  map  of  the  characters’  trip.  As
students  make/draw  items  for  the  model/map,  use  this  as  an
opportunity  to  discuss  the  scale  (size)  and  positional  direction
of  the  items  in  relation  to  the  whole  picture  being  created  (e.g.,
character  is  smaller  than  tree,  character  is  to  the  left  of  the
pond).  Teachers  may  wish  to  have  students  create  a  title  and
simple  legend  for  the  model  and/or  map.
•Have  students  sketch  a  map  of  the  playground  to  demonstrate
that  maps  represent  a  real  place.  Have  students  sit  in  a
chosen  spot  on  the  playground  with  paper  that  is  labelled
up/down/left/right.  Have  the  students  note  what  is
directly  in  front  of  them  and  make  age-appropriate  sketches.
Repeat  this  for  the  right  and  left  side.  As  students  draw,  use
this  as  an  opportunity  to  discuss  the  scale  (size)  of  the  objects
being  drawn,  as  well  as  positional  direction.  Students  may  label
their  maps  or  create  legends.

61ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
Tasks  for  Instruction  and/or  Assessment
Resources/Notes
Unit 3: Place and Time
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
Discovery  Links
(Authorized  Resource)
Formal/Informal  Observation
•Observe  and  note  the  vocabulary  used,  questions  asked,  and
responses  given  as  students  participate  in  the  Globe/Map  Touch
game.  Determine  each  student’s  understanding  of
representation  of  place,  positional  language,  and  awareness  of
map  components.
•Observe  and  note  the  vocabulary  used,  questions  asked,  and
responses  given  as  students  participate  in  the  creation  of  the
model  and/or  map  to  determine  each  student’s  geographic  and
mapping  understanding  (e.g.,  awareness  of  title,  legend/labels,
scale/relative  size),  representation  of  place,  and  positional
direction).  Teachers  may  also  wish  to  observe  students  as  they
interact  with  the  model  and/or  map  centre.
Paper  and  Pencil
•Have  students  create  a  simple  map  to  represent  a  place.  Have
students  sit  in  one  spot  and  draw  a  sketch  of  their  classroom,
another  area  of  the  school,  or  bedroom.  Remind  students  to
include  a  map  title,  and  to  use  the  appropriate  scale  (size)  and
positional  direction  when  creating  their  maps.  Encourage
students  to  label  or  create  a simple  legend  of  one  or  two  items
on  their  map.  Depending  on  students’  interest,  students  may
wish  to  make  a  simple  model  rather  than  a  map.
•Have  students,  with  assistance  from  parents,  complete  an
emergency  fire  exit  plan  map  and/or  model  for  their  home.
Have  students  share  their  maps  and/or  models  with  the  class.
•Have  each  student  create  a  simple  map,  for  the  class  to  follow,
showing  how  to  go  from  their  classroom  to  another  part  of  the
school.  Encourage  students  to  note  any  landmarks  and  provide
direction  symbols.  After  completion  of  the  maps,  the  class  may
take  each  student’s  map  and  follow  it  to  determine  the  map’s
accuracy.
Big Book
•In  My  World
“Once  Upon  a  Place”
Little  Book
•Take  Another  Look
Poster
•Community  Map
Photo  Cards
•Classroom  Map
•School  Map
The  Nystrom  Jumbo  Atlas
(Authorized  Resource)
“Where  do  these  families  live?”  p.4
“What  kinds  of  places  are  in  town?”  p.9
“What  is  a  model?”  p.  16
“What  is  a  map?”  p.  17
“What  do  symbols  mean  on  maps?”  p.18
“How  is  the  globe  like  the  world?”  p.  23
Cross Curricular Links
Health
•Wellness  Choices
Outcome  W-1.8
BLM  W-1.8
Grade 1 Literacy Place for the Early Years
•Mrs.  Chicken  and  the  Hungry
Crocodile by  Won-Ldy  Paye  and
Margaret  H.  Lippert
•Wolf by  Becky  Bloom
•Gifts  by  Barbara  Reid

62ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
OutcomesElaborations - Strategies for Learning and Teaching
Students will be expected to
Unit 3: Place and Time
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
1.3.2  demonstrate  an  understanding
that  the  way  people  live  in  their
community  evolves  over  time
Teacher Talk
Students  will  develop  an  understanding  of  how  people’s  lives
have  changed  over  time,  including  people  in  the  communities
in  which  they  live.  They  will  also  recognize  that  the  passage  of
time  brings  about  interesting  stories  of  people  and  places.
Students  will  become  aware  that  the  passage  of  time  may  be
represented  by  a  pictorial  time  line.
•Have  students  interact  with  an  appropriate  book  as  a  read
aloud.  The  selected  book  should  focus  on  how  people’s  lives
have  changed  over  time.  Discuss  with  students  what  changes
occurred  and  have  students  draw  pictures  showing  one  of  the
changes.  As  a  class,  create  a  pictorial  time  line  of  the  changes
that  occurred  to  one  of  the  characters  throughout  the  story.
Teachers  may  wish  to  use  vocabulary  associated  with  time
(before/after,  past/present,  then/now,  long  ago/today).  Teachers
may  also  wish  to  complete  this  activity  as  part  of  the  100  Day
celebration.  Students  may  wish  to  write  a  prediction  on  what
their  lives  would  be  like  when  they  are  100  years  old.
•Have  students  invite  an  elder/grandparent/local  historian  to  the
class  to  talk  about  how  his/her  life  has  changed  over  time.
Have  students  prepare  “powerful  questions”  for  the  invited
guest.  Teachers  may  wish  to  review  the  criteria  and  questions
charted  in  outcome  1.2.1.  After  the  visit,  have  a  class  discussion
on  how  the  guest’s  life  and  the  community  have  changed  over
time.  Using  the  headings  “Past”  and  “Present”  the  class  may
complete  a  comparison  chart  of  how  the  way  people  live  in  the
community  has  changed.  Involve  the  students  in  a  discussion  of
possible  reasons  why  these  changes  have  taken  place.
•Invite  students  to  interview  a  parent,  grandparent,  or  other  elder
from  their  family  on  what  life  was  like  when  he/she  was  in
grade  1.  As  a  class,  discuss  questions  for  students  to  use  in  their
interviews.  Have  students  bring  their  interview  responses  to
school  and  use  them  to  write  a  narrative  with  a  picture  to
illustrate  the  family  member’s  story.  Teachers  may  wish  to  have
the  students  create  a  simple  pictorial  time  line  to  demonstrate
how  life  has  evolved  (i.e.,  family  member’s  life  in  grade  1  and
student’s  life  today).  Have  students  share  their  drawings  and
stories  with  the  class.

63ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
Tasks  for  Instruction  and/or  Assessment
Resources/Notes
Unit 3: Place and Time
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
Discovery  Links
(Authorized  Resource)
Big Book
•In  My  World
“Hook,  Line,  and  Sinker”
Little  Books
•Great  Grandma  and  I
•Looking  Back
Cross Curricular Links
Mathematics
•Shape  and  Space
Outcome  SS1
Visual Arts
•Outcomes  1.3.2  and  1.5.2
Formal/Informal  Observation
•Observe  and  note  the  vocabulary  used,  questions  asked,  and
responses/opinions  given  as  students  discuss  how  the  lives  of
people  living  in  their  community  have  changed  over  time.
Performance
•Have  students  sort  a  collection  of  pictures/photographs  that
represent  “then  and  now”.  The  pictures  could  depict  for
example,  technology,  clothing  styles,  or  transportation.  Ask
students  to  give  reasons  for  sorting  the  pictures  as  they  did.
Journal
•Ask  students  to  write  a  response  to  prompts  such  as  the
following:
Today,  I  like  to
In  the  past,  people  liked  to
•Have  each  student  write  a  response  telling  what  his/her  life  is
like  today,  and  predicting  what  it  will  be  like  when  he/she  is
old.
Presentation
•Have  students  create  a  simple  pictorial  time  line  of  changes  in
a  visitor’s  life  by  using  information  provided  by  the  visitor.
•Have  students  create  simple  pictorial  time  lines  of  what  life
was  like  100  years  ago,  what  life  is  like  now,  and  what  they
predict  life  will  be  like  in  the  future.  Have  students  share  their
time  lines  with  the  class.
•Have  students  complete  “past”  and  “present”  illustrations
showing  what  life  was  like  for  an  older  family  member  in
grade  1  compared  to  what  it  is  like  for  the  student  in  grade  1.
Have  students  write  brief  descriptions  to  accompany  their
illustration.  Have  students  present  their  drawings  to  the  class
explaining  how  their  way  of  life  has  changed  over  time.
.
.

64ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
OutcomesElaborations - Strategies for Learning and Teaching
Students will be expected to
Unit 3: Place and Time
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
1.3.3  demonstrate  an  understanding
that  Aboriginal  peoples’  relationship
with  place  has  changed  over  time
Teacher Talk
The  focus  of  this  outcome  is  to  help  students  understand  that
the  way  of  life  for  Aboriginal  peoples  has  changed  over  time.
Teachers  will  assist  students  in  developing  an  understanding
that  the  first  people  to  live  in  Atlantic  Canada  were  Aboriginal
peoples  and  that  their  relationship  with  where  they  live  has
changed.  (It  is  important  for  students  to  understand  that
Aboriginal  peoples  were  the  first  to  inhabit  the  Atlantic
Region,  which  is  why  they  are  a  very  important  part  of  our
history.  Please  note  this  is  not  to  be  a  stereotypical  study  of
early  Aboriginal  peoples.  In  some  cases,  outcome  1.3.2  and
1.3.3  may  be  combined.)
•Have  students  interact  with  an  appropriate  book  as  a  read
aloud.  The  selected  book  should  address  the  relationship
between  Aboriginal  peoples  and  place.  After  reading  the  book,
discuss  with  students  the  importance  of  Aboriginal  peoples  as
the  first  people  to  live  in  our  province/region/country.
Using  a  provincial  map,  discuss  with  students  how  Aboriginal
peoples  in  the  past  lived  in  our  province.  At  present,Aboriginal
peoples  live  throughout  the  province,  but  there  are  only  selected
areas  that  are  given  Aboriginal  designation  (i.e.,  Lennox  Island,
Scotchford,  Rocky  Point,  and  Morell).  Engage the  students  in  a
further  discussion  of  what  the  book  has  to  say  about  how  place
is  important  to  Aboriginal  people,  and  how  this  has  changed  in
their  present  life.
•Have  students  invite  a  member  of  the  Aboriginal  community  to
the  class.  Invite  the  guest  to  focus  on  the  relationship  Aboriginal
peoples  have  with  their  environment  and  how  this  relationship
has  changed  over  time.  After  the  visit,  create  a  class  comparison
chart  showing  Aboriginal  life  in  the  past  and  in  the  present.
•Invite  students  to  look  at  illustrations  of  Aboriginal  art/artifacts
or  have  a  member  of  the  Aboriginal  community  bring  art
samples  to  the  class.  Engage  the  students  in  a  discussion  of  how
the  materials  and  ideas  used  for  Aboriginal  art  come  from  the
environment.  Discuss  with  students  the  importance  of  the
environment  to  Aboriginal  peoples,  and  how  this  has  changed
over  time.

65ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
Tasks  for  Instruction  and/or  Assessment
Resources/Notes
Unit 3: Place and Time
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
Discovery  Links
(Authorized  Resource)
Formal/Informal  Observation
•Observe  students  during  shared  reading  and  discussions  to
determine  their  level  of  understanding  of  how  Aboriginal
peoples’  relationship  with  place  has  changed  over  time.
Journal
•Ask  students  to  write  a  response  to  prompts  such  as  the
following:
In  the  past,  Aboriginal  peoples  .
Today  Aboriginal  peoples
                    .
Paper  and  Pencil
•Have  students  illustrate  how  Aboriginal  peoples’  relationship
with  place  has  changed  over  time  by  making  a  Then  and  Now
picture  with  an  accompanying  sentence.
Big Book
•In  My  World
“Mi’kmaq  Calendar”
“A  Summer  Song:  An  Inuit  Poem”
Little  Book
•Welcome  to  Conne  River
Photo  Cards
•Inuit  Carving
•Maliseet  Beadwork
Cross Curricular Links
Visual Arts
•Outcomes  1.4.2,  1.5.2,  and1.8.1

66ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
OutcomesElaborations - Strategies for Learning and Teaching
Students will be expected to
Unit 3: Place and Time
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
1.3.4  explain  how  interactions
between  communities  have  changed
over  time
Teacher Talk
In  this  outcome,  students  expand  upon  the  earlier  concept  of
interactions  among  themselves  and  others  to  include  commu-
nities.  Students  will  examine  how  changes  in  transportation
and  communication  have  made  it  easier  for  communities  to
interact  with  each  other.  (Opportunities  may  arise  where
examples  come  from  local,  national,  or  global  contexts.)
•Have  students  use  a  map  of  their  province  to  identify  the
community  where  they  live.  Brainstorm  with  the  students
other  communities  that  they  have  visited,  and  locate  these  on
the  provincial  map.  (Teachers  may  wish  to  extend  this  activity
to  the  national  or  global  level,  depending  on  student  experience.)
Have  students  provide  reasons  for  why  communities  may
want  to  interact  (examples  may  include  recreation  facilities/
events,  shopping  centres,  schools,  family).  Discuss  with
students  how  transportation  and  communication  between
communities  have  changed  over  time.  Teachers  may  wish  to
connectthis  outcome  with  discussions  from  outcome  1.3.2.
•Have  students  explore  through  picture  books,  photographs,  art,
posters,  or  videos/DVDs  how  means  of  transportation  (such  as
horse,  bike,  boat,  automobile,  train,  airplane)  and  communication
(e.g.,  letter  writing,  telephone,  newspaper,  radio,  television,
computer)  have  changed  over  time.  (Where  possible,  using
materials  from  the  community  would  be  beneficial.)  Discuss
with  students  how  these  have  changed  how  we  interact
(communicate  and  travel)  with  other  communities.  Have
students  explore  possible  changes  in  how  we  travel  between
and/or  communicate  with  other  communities  by  making  an
accordion  (folded)  book.  The  book  would  look  at  the  past  (long
ago),  the  present  (today),  and  the  future  (tomorrow). Have
students  provide  a  brief  explanation  for  each  time  period.
•Have  students,  as  a  class  or  individually,  compose  a  letter(s)  to
another  grade  1  class  in  another  community  inviting  them  to
be  e-mail  pals.  Once  contact  is  established  have  students  e-mail
their  pals  (teachers  may  wish  to  use  e-mail  buddies,  as
described  in  Journey  On  lesson  plan  in  Appendix  E)  to  learn
about  their  twin  community  and  share  information  on  their
own  community.

67ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
Tasks  for  Instruction  and/or  Assessment
Resources/Notes
Unit 3: Place and Time
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
Discovery  Links
(Authorized  Resource)
Performance
•Engage  students  in  a  role-play  of  how  people  communicated
with  people  in  another  community  in  the  past,  and  how  they
communicate  today.  Have  students  explain  how  this  has
changed  how  communities  interact.
Journal
•Ask  students  to  write  a  response  explaining  how  changes  in
transportation  and  communication  have  allowed  communities
to  interact  more  with  each  other.
Paper  and  Pencil
•Invite  students  to  create  Emails  for  their  Email  pals  to  describe
how  their  communities  have  interacted  in  the  past,  and  how
they  interact  today.  The  Emails  should  focus  on  how
communication  and  transportation  have  allowed  the
communities  to  interact  more  closely  with  one  another.
Presentation
•Have  students  draw  pictures  to  show  how  people  travelled
from  their  community  to  another  community  in  the  past,  and
how  they  travel  today.  Have  students  write  brief  explanations
of  how  this  has  helped  communities  interact.
Big Book
•In  My  World
“Transportation”
“Communication”
Little  Book
•Keeping  in  Touch
Poster
•Where Does Your Letter Go?
The  Nystrom  Jumbo  Atlas
(Authorized  Resource)
“Where  are  we  in  Canada?”  p.  21
“Where  are  we  in  the  world?”  p.  24
Cross Curricular Links
Technology
•Telecommunications  (Awareness)
Outcomes  B10.1  and  B10.2



71
ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  1
Unit 4: Needs and Wants
Overview
GRADE  1:  INTERACTIONS
Outcomes
Opportunities  for
Integration
Anticipated Time  for
Completion
This  unit  introduces  students  to  simple  economic  concepts  that
they  experience  in  their  daily  lives.  In  the  first  outcome,  students
will  build  on  what  they  have  learned  about  needs  and  wants  in  the
previous  kindergarten  year.  As  they  investigate  this  topic,  they  will
gain  a  greater  understanding  that  all  people  have  similar  needs,  that
wants  vary  from  person  to  person,  and  that  respect  for  other
people’s  needs  and  wants  is  important.  In  the  second  outcome,
students  will  explore  factors  that  influence  how  needs  and  wants  are
met,  and  will  identify  such  ways  as  working,  sharing,  trading,
borrowing,  and  giving.  They  will  explore  some  of  the  services  and
facilities  available  in  their  community,  and  understand  that  people
need  to  co-operate  with  each  other  to  meet  their  various  needs  and
wants.  They  will  gain  an  understanding  of  the  importance  of
volunteer  work  in  their  community,  and  identify  some  of  the  factors
that  influence  their  choices  as  consumers.  In  the  third  outcome,
students  will  gain  an  understanding  of  how  communities  depend
on  each  other  for  the  exchange  of  good  and  services.  They  will
recognize  that  goods  produced  and  services  available  in  one
community  may  be  different  from  those  available  in  other
communities.  This  will  assist  students  in  expanding  their
understanding  of  how  communities  depend  on  each  other.
Students will be expected to
1.4.1recognize  that  all  people  have  ne