er  library/
resource/media  centre  staff,  parents,  and  community  agencies
collaborate  to  ensure  students’  access  to  available  resources  to
support  resource-based  learning  and  teaching.
Literacy  plays  a  vital  role  in  the  learning  experiences  of  social
studies.  It  promotes  the  students’  ability  to  comprehend  and
compose  spoken,  written,  and  visual  text  that  are  commonly  used
by  individuals  and  groups  to  participate  fully,  critically,  and
effectively  in  society.  The  multiplicity  of  communication  channels
made  possible  by  technology,  and  the  increasing  cultural  and
linguistic  diversity  of  the  world,  call  for  a  broadened  view  of
literacy.  Thus,  the  goal  of  literacy  learning  through  social  studies
is  to  foster  language  development  and  the  critical  engagement
necessary  for  students  to  design  their  own  futures.
Literacy through Social
Studies

ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  116
CONTEXTS  FOR  LEARNING  AND  TEACHING
The  ability  to  read  is  critical  for  success  in  school.  Therefore,  it  is
paramount  that  teachers  are  sensitive  to  this  process  in  social
studies  instruction.  Reading  in  the  content  area  of  social  studies
requires  that  attention  be  given  to  setting  the  stage  and  using
various  strategies  to  help  students  address  the  reading  task  itself.
Writing  in  social  studies  is  an  important  process.  Through
writing,  students  can  discover  what  they  know  about  a  particular
topic  and  can  communicate  their  learning.  In  social  studies  there
are  an  abundance  of  writing  activities  in  which  to  engage
students.  In  addition  to  reading,  writing,  and  speaking,  other
textual  modes  such  as  audio  and  visual  media  also  play  a  part  in
social  studies  classrooms.
Strategies  to  promote  literacy  through  social  studies  include  those
that  help  students  comprehend  the  meaning  of  words,  symbols,
pictures,  diagrams,  maps,  and  other  genres.  Students  will
investigate  a  range  of  media  at  different  times  and  places  and  have
many  opportunities  to  comprehend  and  compose  in  unfamiliar
contexts.  Most  will  be  able  to  debate,  persuade,  and  explain  in  a
variety  of  genres,  including  the  artistic  and  technological.  The
social  studies  program  will  help  students  become  culturally
sensitive  and  effective  cross-cultural  communicators.
Critical  literacy  includes  awareness  of  stereotyping,  cultural  bias,
author’s  intent,  hidden  agendas,  silent  voices,  and  omissions  in
texts.  Students  are  encouraged  to  be  aware  that  texts  are
constructed  by  authors  who  have  purposes  for  writing  and  make
particular  choices  when  doing  so.  Approaches  informed  by  critical
literacy  aid  students  in  comprehending  texts  at  a  deeper  level,  and
also  assist  in  the  construction  and  reconstruction  of  their  text.
Students  are  encouraged  to  view  texts  from  a  variety  of  perspec-
tives  and  to  interpret  the  various  levels  of  meaning  in  a  given  text.
Literacy  for  active  citizenship  involves  understanding  different
perspectives  on  key  democratic  struggles,  learning  how  to
investigate  current  issues,  and  participating  creatively  and
critically  in  community  problem  solving  and  decision  making.
Exercising  civic  rights  and  responsibilities  is  a  practical  expression
of  important  social  values,  and  requires  specific  personal,
interpersonal,  and  advocacy  skills.
Technology,  including  Information  and  Communication
Technology  (ICT),  plays  a  major  role  in  the  learning  and  teaching
of  social  studies.  Computers  and  related  technologies  are  valuable
classroom  tools  in  the  acquisition,  analysis,  and  presentation  of
information.  These  technologies  provide  further  opportunity  for
communication  and  collaboration          allowing  students  to  become
more  active  participants  in  research  and  learning.
ICT  and  related  technology  (digital  video  and  digital  cameras,
scanners,  CD-ROMs,  word  processing  software,  graphics  software,
Integration of Technology
in Social Studies

ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  117
CONTEXTS  FOR  LEARNING  AND  TEACHING
video-editing  software,  HTML  editors,  and  the  Internet
including  the  World  Wide  Web,  databases,  electronic  discussions,
e-mail,  and  audio  and  video  conferencing)  afford  numerous
possibilities  for  enhancing  learning  and  teaching.  Computer  and
other  technologies  are  intended  to  enhance  the  social  studies
learning  environment.  In  that  context,  technological  resources  can
provide  a  variety  of  opportunities.
•The  Internet  and  CD-ROMs  increase  access  to  information.
This  gives  teachers  and  students  quicker  and  easier  access  to
extensive  and  current  information.  Research  skills  are  key  to
efficient  use  of  these  resources.  Questions  of  validity,
accuracy,  bias,  and  interpretation  must  still  be  applied  to
information  available  on  the  Internet  and  CD-ROMs.
•Interactions  and  conversations  via  e-mail,  video  and  audio
conferencing,  student-created  web  sites,  and  on-line
discussion  groups  provide  connections  between  students  and
people  from  cultures  around  the  world.  This  exposure  to
first-hand  information  will  enable  students  to  directly
employ  inquiry  skills.
•Students  present  what  they  have  learned  in  a  wide  variety  of
forms  (e.g.,  graphs,  maps,  text,  graphic  organizers,  web  sites,
multimedia  presentations)  that  fit  their  learning  styles.  These
presentations  can  be  shared  with  others,  both  in  their
classroom  and  beyond.
•Students  are  actively  involved  in  their  learning  through
controlling  information  gathering,  processing,  and  presenta-
tion.  For  example,  Geographic  Information  Systems  (GIS)
software  enables  students  to  collect  data  on  a  community,
plot  the  data  using  Global  Positioning  Systems  (GPS),  and
analyze  and  present  their  findings  by  creating  maps  that
demonstrate  their  learning.
The  Prince  Edward  Island  social  studies  curriculum  is  committed
to  the  principle  that  learners  of  English  as  an  additional  language
(EAL)  should  be  full  participants  in  all  aspects  of  social  studies
education.    English  proficiency  and  cultural  differences  must  not
be  a  barrier  to  full  participation.  The  social  studies  curriculum
provides  materials  that  reflect  accurately  and  fully  the  reality  of
Canada’s  diversity  and  fosters  respect  of  cultural  differences  as  an
essential  component.    All  students  should  study  a  comprehensive
social  studies  curriculum  with  high-quality  instruction  and
coordinated  assessment.
The Foundation  for  the  Atlantic  Canada  Social  Studies  Curriculum
emphasizes  communication,  inquiry  and  participation  as  essential
processes  in  the  social  studies  curriculum.    Students  and  EAL
learners  in  particular,  need  to  have  opportunities  and  be  given
encouragement  and  support  for  speaking,  writing,  reading,
listening,  interpreting,  analyzing,  and  expressing  ideas  and
information  in  social  studies  classes.    Such  efforts  have  the
Social Studies for EAL Learners

ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  118
CONTEXTS  FOR  LEARNING  AND  TEACHING
potential  to  help  EAL  learners  overcome  barriers  that  will
facilitate  their  participation  as  active  citizens  in  Canadian  society.
To  this  end:
•schools  should  provide  EAL  learners  with  support  in  their
dominant  language  and  English  language  while  learning
social  studies;
•teachers,  counselors,  and  other  professionals  should
consider  the  English-language  proficiency  level  of  EAL
learners  as  well  as  their  prior  course  work  in  social  studies;
•the  social  studies  proficiency  level  of  EAL  learners  should
be  solely  based  on  their  prior  academic  record  and  not
other  factors;
•social  studies  teaching,  curriculum,  and  assessment
strategies  should  be  based  on  best  practices  and  build  on
the  prior  knowledge  and  experiences  of  students  and  on
their  cultural  heritage;
•the  importance  of  social  studies  and  the  nature  of  the  social
studies  program  should  be  communicated,  with
appropriate  language  support,  to  both  students  and
parents;  and
•to  verify  that  barriers  have  been  removed,  educators  should
monitor  enrollment  and  achievement  data  to  determine
whether  EAL  learners  have  gained  access  to,  and  are
succeeding  in,  social  studies  courses.
Education for Sustainable
Development
Education  for  sustainable  development  (ESD)  involves
incorporating  the  key  themes  of  sustainable  development  –  such
as  poverty  alleviation,  human  rights,  health,  environmental
protection  and  climate  change  –  into  the  education  system.    ESD
is  a  complex  and  evolving  concept.  It  requires  learning  about  the
key  themes  from  a  social,  cultural,  environmental  and  economic
perspective  and  explores  how  those  factors  are  inter-related  and
inter-dependent.
With  this  in  mind,  it  is  important  that  all  teachers,  including
social  studies  teachers,  attempt  to  incorporate  these  key  themes
in  their  subject  areas.    One  tool  that  may  be  used  is  the
searchable  on-line  database  Resources  for  Rethinking,  found  at
http://r4r.ca/en.    It  provides  teachers  with  access  to  materials  that
integrate  ecological,  social  and  economic  spheres  through  active,
relevant,  interdisciplinary  learning.

ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  119
CONTEXTS  FOR  LEARNING  AND  TEACHING
Assessing and
Evaluating
Student Learning
Introduction
Assessment and evaluation are  essential  components  of  teaching
and  learning  in  social  studies.
Assessment is  the  systematic  process  of  gathering  information  on
student  learning.
Evaluation is  the  process  of  analyzing,  reflecting  upon,  and
summarizing  assessment  information,  and  making  judgments  or
decisions  based  upon  the  information  gathered.
Without  effective  assessment  and  evaluation,  it  is  impossible  to
know  whether  students  have  learned,  whether  teaching  has  been
effective,  or  how  to  best  address  student  learning  needs.  The
quality  of  the  assessment  and  evaluation  in  the  educational
process  has  a  profound  and  well-established  link  to  student
performance.  Research  consistently  shows  that  regular  monitoring
and  feedback  are  essential  to  improving  student  learning.  What  is
assessed  and  evaluated,  how  it  is  assessed  and  evaluated,  and  how
results  are  communicated  send  clear  messages  to  students  and
others  about  what  is  really  valued—what  is  worth  learning,  how  it
should  be  learned,  what  elements  of  quality  are  considered  most
important,  and  how  well  students  are  expected  to  perform.
Teacher-developed  assessments  and  evaluations  have  a  wide  variety
of  uses,  such  as
•providing  feedback  to  improve  student  learning
•determining  if  curriculum  outcomes  have  been  achieved
•certifying  that  students  have  achieved  certain  levels  of
performance
•setting  goals  for  future  student  learning
•communicating  with  parents  about  their  children’s  learning
•providing  information  to  teachers  on  the  effectiveness  of  their
teaching,  the  program,  and  the  learning  environment
•meeting  the  needs  of  guidance  and  administration  personnel.
In  order  to  provide  accurate,  useful  information  about  the
achievement  and  instructional  needs  of  students,  certain  guiding
principles  for  the  development,  administration,  and  use  of
assessments  must  be  followed.  Principles  for  Fair  Student
Assessment  Practices  for  Education  in  Canada  (1993)  articulates
five  basic  assessment  principles.
These  principles  highlight  the  need  for  assessment  which  ensures
that
•the  best  interests  of  the  student  are  paramount
•assessment  informs  teaching  and  promotes  learning
•assessment  is  an  integral  and  ongoing  part  of  the  learning
process  and  is  clearly  related  to  the  curriculum  outcomes
•assessment  is  fair  and  equitable  to  all  students  and  involves
multiple  sources  of  information.
Guiding Principles

ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  120
CONTEXTS  FOR  LEARNING  AND  TEACHING
While  assessments  may  be  used  for  different  purposes  and
audiences,  all  assessments  must  give  each  student  optimal
opportunity  to  demonstrate  what  he/she  knows  and  can  do.
In  the  social  studies  classroom,  there  should  be  a  balanced
approach  to  assessment  in  which  emphasis  is  given  to  the  learning
process  as  well  as  the  products  of  learning.
Instruction  and  evaluation  are  centred  around  outcomes.  Not
only  are  outcomes  used  in  providing  structured  teaching  and
learning,  but  they  also  provide  a  framework  for  assessment  and
evaluation.
Assessment  in  social  studies  is  an  integral  and  ongoing  part  of  the
learning  process.  Assessment  can  be  used  to  shape  instruction  to
better  ensure  student  success.  Assessment  strategies  should  inform
the  daily  instructional  process.  Moreover,  students  require
frequent  opportunities  to  assess  and  evaluate  their  own  learning
and  performance.
To  determine  how  well  students  are  learning,  assessment  strategies
have  to  be  designed  to  systematically  gather  information  on  the
achievement  of  the  curriculum  outcomes.  In  planning  assess-
ments,  teachers  should  use  a  broad  range  of  strategies  in  an
appropriate  balance  to  give  students  multiple  opportunities  to
demonstrate  their  knowledge,  skills,  and  attitudes.
•With 
Formal/Informal  Observation,  information  is  gathered
while  a  lesson  is  in  progress.  When  observation  is  formal,  the
student  is  made  aware  of  what  is  being  observed  and  the
criteria  being  assessed.  When  used  informally,  observation
could  be  a  frequent,  but  brief,  check  on  a  given  criterion.  You
might  be    observing  the  student’s  participation  level,  use  of  a
piece  of  equipment,  or  application  of  a  process.  You  could
record  the  results  with  a  checklist,  a  rating  scale,  or  written
notes.  Remember  to  plan  the  criteria,  have  recording  forms
ready,  and  be  sure  all  students  are  observed  in  a  reasonable
time  period.
•
Performance  encourages  learning  through  active  participa-
tion.  This  could  be  a  demonstration/presentation.  The
performance  is  most  often  assessed  through  observation.
•
Journals  provide  opportunity  for  students  to  express
thoughts  and  ideas  in  a  reflective  way.  They  permit  a  student
to  consider  strengths  and  weaknesses,  attitudes,  interests,  and
new  ideas.
•
Interviews  promote  understanding  and  application  of
concepts.  Interviewing  a  student  allows  the  teacher  to  confirm
that  learning  has  taken  place  beyond  factual  recall.  They  may
be  brief  or  extensive.  Students  should  know  what  criteria  will
be  used  to  assess  formal  interviews.  This  assessment  technique
provides  an  opportunity  to  students  whose  verbal  presenta-
tion  skills  are  stronger  than  their  written  skills.
Assessment

ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  121
CONTEXTS  FOR  LEARNING  AND  TEACHING
•Paper  and  Pencil  assessments  can  be  formative  or  summative
(e.g.,  written  assignments  or  tests).
•
Presentations  require  students  to  analyze  and  interpret
information  and  then  communicate  it.  A  presentation  may  be
made  orally,  in  written/pictorial  form,  as  a  project  summary,
or  by  using  video  or  computer  software.
•
Portfolios  allow  students  to  be  central  in  the  process.
Students  can  make  decisions  about  what  goes  in,  how  it  is
used,  and  how  it  is  evaluated.  The  portfolio  should  provide  a
long  term  record  of  growth  in  learning  skills.
Evaluation  in  social  studies  emphasizes  assessment  activities  that
incorporate  the  skills,  perspectives,  and  knowledge  of  the  many
fields  and  disciplines  within  social  studies.
Evaluation  involves  teachers,  and  others,  analysing  and  reflecting
upon  information  about  student  learning  gathered  in  a  variety  of
ways.  This  process  requires
•synthesizing  information  from  multiple  sources
•weighing  and  balancing  all  available  information
•using  a  high  level  of  professional  judgment  in  making
decisions  based  upon  that  information.
Reporting  on  student  learning  should  focus  on  the  extent  to
which  students  have  achieved  the  curriculum  outcomes.
Reporting  involves  communicating  the  summary  and  interpreta-
tion  of  information  about  student  learning  to  various  audiences
who  require  it.  Teachers  have  the  responsibility  to  explain
accurately  what  progress  students  have  made  in  their  learning,
and  to  respond  to  parent  and  student  inquiries  about  learning.
Narrative  reports  on  progress  and  achievement  can  provide
information  on  student  learning  that  letter  or  number  grades
alone  cannot.  Such  reports  might,  for  example,  suggest  ways  in
which  students  can  improve  their  learning  and  identify  ways  in
which  teachers  and  parents  can  best  provide  support.
Effective  communication  with  parents  regarding  their  children’s
progress  is  essential  in  fostering  successful  home-school  partner-
ships.  The  report  card  is  one  means  of  reporting  individual
student  progress.  Other  means  include  the  use  of  conferences,
notes,  phone  calls,  and  electronic  methods.
Evaluation
Reporting

ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  122
Entry     Grade 9
Social  Studies
Program
Curriculum Overview
The  social  studies  program  for  entry          grade  9  is  designed
around  ten  conceptual  organizers  as  identified  below.
CURRICULUM  OVERVIEW
Entry
Connections
Grade 1
Interactions
Grade 2
Change
Grade 3
Provincial
Identity
Grade 4
Exploration
Grade 5
Societies
Grade 6
PEI History/
World
Cultures
Grade 7
Empowerment
Grade 9
Interdependence
Grade 8
Canadian
Identity
Learner

ATLANTIC  CANADA  SOCIAL  STUDIES  CURRICULUM:  GRADE  123
Entry:  Connections
Unit One:  I Am Unique
Unit Two:  Family
Unit Three:  Community
CURRICULUM  OVERVIEW
I Am Unique
Family
Community
Connections
Students will be expected to
E.1.1recognize  and  discuss  personal  interests,  characteristics,
and  preferences  that  make  them  unique  and  special
E.1.2begin  to  develop  an  awareness  of  needs  and  wants  that 