ain 
• creating and layering sounds to discover articulation, timbre, and dynamic effects with movement and 
instruments
• demonstrating crescendo and diminuendo dynamics with movement
• experiencing fermata and tempo within their music making through movement
• experiencing word play with grade three rhythms using body percussion and instruments
• experiencing the parts of an Orffestration with their voices and body percussion before playing on pitched 
and non-pitched percussion, ukulele, and recorder instruments
 Musical Play for Developing Vocal Technique
Learners can demonstrate proper vocal play and rest by:
• mimicking their music specialist and/or a friend (sit a struggling singer beside a strong one)
• practicing how to breathe (hands on belly - 3 breaths in/out) while sitting and standing tall 
• using proper names for their voices 
• practicing how to sing beautifully while playing instruments quietly
• practicing how to play recorder after singing the melody (using candle breathe to prepare the transition) 
           MUSICAL ARTISTRY: VOCAL
MA 1.2
Elaborations

98
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA   
Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)
Learners who have achieved this outcome should be able to ...
Achievement Indicators

Citizenship 

Critical Thinking Personal-Career Development  Essential
Graduation
Competencies

Communication  Technological Fluency  Creativity and Innovation  
a. use musical play to experience songs, chants, games, and dances from a variety of cultural contexts;
b. listen and respond to music from a variety of languages, genres, styles, and cultural contexts;
c. identify grade three musical elements and patterns reflected in a variety of musical traditions;  
d. describe music within their daily lives; 
e. describe their own cultural musical experiences as well as those of their fellow learners and community; and
f. describe connections between musics from a variety of cultural contexts. 
CULTURAL CONTEXTS & CONNECTIONS
CCC 1
Learners are expected to ...
demonstrate an understanding of diverse musical genres, styles, and cultural contexts 
and connections through musical play.
RememberingUnderstandingApplyingAnalysingEvaluatingCreating

99
  K-3 MUSIC - MUSA  
           
CULTURAL CONTEXTS 
           & CONNECTIONS
CCC 1
Learners will explore genres, styles, cultural contexts and connections through musical play. All known 
kindergarten through grade 2 and new grade three musical elements should be explored in their everyday 
music making by regularly choosing songs, listening selections, games, and activities from a variety of diverse 
resources. It is vitally important to seek out resources that have been created by or with the involvement of 
a member of the culture or tradition represented. 
Culturally responsive teaching is an intentional process of getting to know your students, how they learn, and 
what is important to them, and creating an environment for learning that values those things. Music is deeply 
tied to culture. Incorporating a variety of diverse musical traditions into your teaching is a meaningful way to 
practice culturally responsive teaching in the music room. The exploration of diverse musics from the beginning 
of a learners' school music experience enables the discovery of connections between peoples around the world 
and in their own communities. It encourages the opportunity to experience the role that music plays in their 
own lives, and helps expand their musical palettes while they are still receptive to new and interesting sounds. 
This is a powerful opportunity both to celebrate and explore the diversity that already exists in your classroom, 
and to prepare your learners to be socially responsible citizens in a globalized world.
Three Elements of Meaningful In-Depth Explorations of Diverse Musical Traditions
Experiencing Music with a Culture Bearer
The most effective ways to bring music from any tradition into your music room include:
• inviting a guest musician or culture bearer into your classroom to share their knowledge and lived 
experiences
• using video performances and interviews to provide the next best “immersion” experience for your 
learners (if a guest is not possible) 
• using audio performances and interviews with photographs provided for visual context
When it comes to musics that are not our own, we are far from experts, so we should look to those who are! 
Adopt a mindset of being an “explorer” of new musics along with your learners, and seek out resources that 
were made by or in consultation with a member of that culture to help ensure you are being respectful and 
sharing the music appropriately.
Context and Opportunity for Connection
Help your learners make connections with their own lived experiences and build empathy by:
• placing music within its sociocultural context 
• sharing stories and picture books
• celebrating holidays
• exploring a message or shared experience with which your learners can connect
What similarities can learners find between this musical tradition and their own lives? What connections 
can they make to other music they’ve explored? Learners at this level can identify shared experiences across 
cultural traditions, such as the common experiences of dancing at a celebration or singing lullabies to babies, 
and are often eager to share their own.
Active Engagement and Music Making
Provide active music making opportunities for you and your learners to explore and engage with all musics to 
interact and create deeper connections with the music they are exploring, including:
• participatory community dances with simple steps
• call and response or simple repetitive songs in their original language
• rhythms that can be recreated on classroom instruments when authentic instruments are not available
When possible, try to mimic the transmission processes of the musical tradition. Do they learn music by rote? 
Do they participate in group improvisation? Use this as a chance to try something new!
Elaborations

100
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA   
Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)
Learners who have achieved this outcome should be able to ...
Achievement Indicators

Citizenship 

Critical Thinking Personal-Career Development  Essential
Graduation
Competencies

Communication  

Technological Fluency  

Creativity and Innovation  
a. perform their music with each other within their classroom environment;
b. perform their music with others in informal settings; 
c. perform their music with others in formal settings; and
d. demonstrate performance etiquette both as a performer or audience member.
SHARING & PERFORMING 
SP 1
Learners are expected to ...
perform musical pieces for a variety of audiences.
RememberingUnderstandingApplyingAnalysingEvaluatingCreating

101
  K-3 MUSIC - MUSA  
           SHARING & PERFORMING
SP 1
Learners are expected to share their musical pieces with one another, their teacher, school, parents and 
community. This creating and sharing presentation process requires much social interaction. The many aspects 
of music making (movement, singing, dramatization, and playing instruments) allows individuals to play their 
favourite part in the sharing process. Sharing their most comfortable musical gifts with others in smaller 
and increasingly larger settings will help grade three learners develop their understanding that this is a very 
important step in their music making process.
Simple Collaborative Skills for Best Music Making, Sharing and Performing:
Learners gain an understanding of the importance of working with others in the creating and sharing music 
making process by:
• showing positive creative musical play
• respecting their own and others' space bubble 
• applying self-regulation skills
• applying social-emotional skills
• active listening to others
• learning their sense of place and purpose within the musical experience
Grade three learners will develop an important sense of who they uniquely are and where they uniquely fit 
within their class through the sharing and performing experience. The process of creative musical play with 
a focus on a sharing adventure allows for a further exploration of emotions that can be experienced with 
different themes for different audiences. Such a new and exciting musical activity should be embraced in 
small and simple steps with a very positive outlook. This can help alleviate any hesitations towards sharing 
experiences.
Sharing Performances Ideas  
Informal Performance
An informal approach to sharing and performing continues to be most appropriate for this age. Not having 
a set performance date makes this a more relaxed experience and shifts the focus on the process over the 
product. Some examples are:
• sharing with other classmates and their homeroom teacher
• inviting school classes to the musicroom to see a work in progress or a finished product of a work
• inviting their class community families to a sharing session
• recording the performances using audio/video to be showcased online for families to watch
Formal Performance
A formal approach to sharing and performing focuses on the process of preparing for a school concert with 
an established date. Some examples of more relaxed approaches in a larger and more formal setting at this 
primary level are:
• establishing a countdown to the special concert date
• creating small, short, and simple sharing performances within the larger school concert setting
• encouraging positive and meaningful sharing of their special musical gifts to the large audience
Elaborations

102
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA   
Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)
Learners who have achieved this outcome should be able to ...
Achievement Indicators

Citizenship 

Critical Thinking Personal-Career Development  Essential
Graduation
Competencies

Communication  

Technological Fluency  

Creativity and Innovation  
a. identify the choices made during the creative musical process to their work and the work of others; 
b. depict simple responses as a performer or audience member to a performance;
c. articulate simple constructive feedback about musical creations and performances;
d. examine grade three elements used in their live and recorded performances; and 
e. identify emotional responses to their musical creations and sharing opportunities.
REFLECTING, RESPONDING, & ANALYZING 
RRA 1
Learners are expected to ...
refine live and recorded performances using the creative musical process
RememberingUnderstandingApplyingAnalysingEvaluatingCreating

103
  K-3 MUSIC - MUSA  
           REFLECTING, RESPONDING &           ANALYSING
RRA 1
Learners are expected to reflect upon, and respond to musical performances in a variety of ways through 
musical play. Grade three learners will be able to practice more developed active listening and critical 
thinking skills throughout the reflecting and analyzing process, while exploring the elements of music through 
movement, discussion, listening, drawing, dramatizing, or playing instruments. Learners will also learn how 
to acknowledge differing purposes, views, and reactions to music while working with others. Such a creative 
music making process gives opportunity for learners to develop an important sense of who they uniquely are 
and where they uniquely fit within their class. It also enables an opportunity for the exploration of emotions 
that can be experienced while music making with different themes. 
Reflecting and Responding Ideas
Simple questions to provoke active listening and 
critical thinking and reflection:
• Can you use one word to describe the shared 
music?
• Can you use one word to describe how the music 
makes you feel!
• What instrument could you add to make the 
music better?
• What Grade 3 elements are hiding in the music?
• What did we do well?  
• What can we work on if we share this music 
again?
Simple ways to encourage learners to respond and 
reflect upon what they felt about their music making 
sharing process plus how they might create an even 
better future musical performance are:
• drawing a picture
• describing emotions expressed by the music
• dramatizing an emotion they felt 
• creating a movement to show how the music 
made them feel
• playing an instrument to make the music better
• using scarves and/or markers and student 
whiteboards to draw their musical interpretation 
Elaborations



105
  K-3 MUSIC - MUSA  
REFERENCES
Birkenshaw-Fleming, L. (1996). An Orff Mosaic from Canada: A collection of music, accompaniments, poems, dances, 
essays and teaching suggestions contributed by teachers from across Canada. New York, NY, USA: Schott Music 
Corporation. 
Carnegie Hall. (2023). Musical Explorers Digital. https://www.carnegiehall.org/Education/Programs/Musical-Explorers/
Digital
Council of Atlantic Ministers of Education and Training. (2015). Atlantic Canada Framework for Essential Graduation 
Competencies. Retrieved November 3, 2023, from https://www.ednet.ns.ca/files/curriculum/atlantic_canada_
essential_grad_competencies.pdf
Delelles, Randy & Kriske, Jeff (2011). GamePlan: An Active Music Curriculum For Children, Kindergarten through Grade 5. 
Las Vegas, NV, USA: Kid sounds LLC.
Durlak, J.A., Weissberg, R.P., Dymnicki, A., Taylor, R.D., & Schellinger, K.B. (2011). The impact of enhancing students’ 
social and emotional learning: A meta-analysis of school-based universal interventions. Child Development, 82, 
405-432.
East, Helen ( 2016). The Singing Sack: 28 Song-Stories from Around the World. London, England: Collins Music
Krathwal D.R. (2002). A Revision of Bloom’s Taxonomy, An Overview. Theory into Practice. 41(4), 212-218.
Kulich, Birthe (1989). Friendly Bear’s Song Book (Growing with Music). Vancouver, B.C., Canada : Empire Music Co. Ltd. 
McKoy, C. L., & Lind, V. R. (2023). Culturally responsive teaching in music education: From understanding to application. 
Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group.
Moody, Marcelline (2008). Reach for a Star: A Teacher’s Recorder Manual Book 1. Canada:Berandol Music Ltd. 
Roberts, J. C., & Beegle, A. C. (2018). World Music Pedagogy, Volume II: Elementary Music Education. Routledge.
Sieck, S. (2017). Teaching with respect: Inclusive Pedagogy for Choral directors. Hal Leonard.
Srinivasan, M.  (2019)  SEL Everyday:  Integrating Social and Emotional Learning with Instruction in Secondary 
Classrooms.  W.W. Norton & Company.  
“Standards for the 21st Century Learner to launch during AASL National Conference.” American Library Association. 
2007. http://www.ala.org/ala/pressreleases2007/october2007/standards07.htm (Accessed 03 Nov, 2021) 
Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning (CASEL). (n.d.). Home - CASEL.
Watts, S. H. (2018). World Music Pedagogy, volume I: Early childhood education. Routledge. 
Wood, Donna (1999). Move, Sing, Listen, Play: Preparing the Young Child for Music. Alfred Music
Wooten, Victor L. ( 2006). The Music Lesson: A Spiritual search for Growth Through Music. Toronto, Canada: Penguin 
Group. 
Weissberg, R.P. & Cascarino, J. (2013). Academic learning + social-emotional learning = national priority. Phi Delta 
Kappan, 95 (2), 8-13.
Wiglesworth, M., Lendrum, A., Oldfield, J., Scott, A., ten Bokkel, I., Tate, K., & Emery, C. (2016). The impact of trial stage, 
developer involvement and international transferability on universal social and emotional learning programme 
outcomes: A meta-analysis. Cambridge Journal of Education, 46, 347-376.