earning (formative)
• assessment of learning to determine student progress relative to curriculum outcomes (summative)
Triangulation is a process by which a teacher uses evidence about student learning from three different sources. These 
sources include conversations, observations, and products. Collecting data from a balance of these sources ensures 
reliable and valid assessment of student learning. 
Evaluation involves analyzing and reflecting upon various forms of evidence of student learning and making judgments or 
decisions regarding student learning based upon that evidence.
Effective assessment strategies
• must be valid in that they measure what is intended to be measured and are reliable in that they consistently achieve 
the same results when used again, or similar results with a similar group of students; 
• are appropriate for the purpose of instruction and learning strategies used;
• are explicit and communicate to students and parents the expectations and criteria used to determine the level of 
achievement;
• are comprehensive and enable all students to have diverse and multiple opportunities to demonstrate their learning 
consistently, independently, and in a range of contexts in everyday instruction;
• accommodate the diverse learning needs and experiences of the students;
• allow for relevant, descriptive, and supportive feedback that gives students clear directions for improvement, and 
engages students in metacognitive self-assessment and goal setting that can increase their success as learners; and
• assist teachers in selecting appropriate instruction and intervention strategies to promote the gradual release of 
responsibility of learning.
Students should know what they 
are expected to learn as designated 
by SCOs and the criteria that will 
be used to determine the quality of 
their achievement. 
Assessment must provide 
opportunities for students to reflect 
on their progress, evaluate their 
learning, and set goals for future 
learning.
CURRICULUM DESIGN

15
  K-3 MUSIC - MUSA  
Social and Emotional Learning (SEL)
Social and emotional learning is the process through which children and adults acquire and effectively apply the 
knowledge, attitudes, and skills necessary to understand and manage emotions, set and achieve goals, feel and show 
empathy for others, establish and maintain positive relationships, and make responsible decisions (Weissberg & 
Cascarino, 2013).
The benefits of social and emotional learning (SEL) are well-researched. Evidence demonstrates that an education 
integrated with SEL yields positive outcomes for students, adults, and school communities. These findings include 
increased social and emotional skills, academic performance, mental wellness, healthy behaviours, school climate and 
safety, and positive lifetime outcomes (Durlak et al., 2011).
Students will experience a sense of belonging and emotional safety when teachers develop a supportive atmosphere 
where students feel valued and are encouraged to express their ideas and emotions.  While SEL isn’t a designated subject 
like history or math, it must be woven into a school’s curriculum and community (Durlak et al., 2011; Wiglesworth et al., 
2016). The following five skills provide examples of how social-emotional learning competencies can be incorporated into 
the curriculum:
Self-Awareness entails the understanding of one’s own emotions, personal identity, goals and values. Integrating self-
awareness involves planning activities and practices that help students understand and connect with their thoughts, 
emotions, and strengths and how they influence behaviour;  
Self-Management entails skills and attitudes that help students to regulate emotions and behaviours.  Integrating self-
management involves developing students’ organizational skills, resilience, and goal-setting abilities through structured 
activities, personalized learning plans, and providing consistent feedback;
Social Awareness entails recognizing the perspective of those with the same or different backgrounds and empathizing 
and feeling compassion. Integrating social awareness involves incorporating diverse perspectives, cultural contexts, and 
collaboration while encouraging students to understand and appreciate the broader societal implications of the content 
they are learning;  
Relationship Skills entail the tools to establish and maintain healthy relationships and effectively navigate settings with 
different social norms and demands. Integrating relationship skills involves fostering collaborative projects, encouraging 
effective communication and teamwork, and enabling students to develop positive interpersonal connections that 
enhance their learning experience and
Responsible Decision-making entails the knowledge, skills and attitudes to make caring and constructive choices about 
personal behaviour and social interactions across diverse settings.  Integrating responsible decision-making within 
lessons involves incorporating real-world scenarios, ethical considerations, and critical information analysis to make 
thoughtful choices.
MUSIC LEARNING ENVIRONMENT 

16
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA   
Supporting English as an Additional Language (EAL) Learners
Multilingual learners add valuable experiences to the classroom. The linguistic knowledge and experiences of English 
as an additional language (EAL) students can extend the understanding of the linguistic diversity of all students. When 
the language, prior knowledge, and culture of EAL students are valued, respected, and incorporated into learning, the 
learning environment is enhanced.
Supportive learning includes classroom practices that affirm cultural values and leverage students’ home language 
and prior knowledge. Making connections to content and language structures in their home language and English is 
encouraged when possible. It is also essential that EAL students make connections between their learning in English 
and learning in other curricular areas and use learning contexts in other subjects to practice, reinforce, and extend their 
language skills.  Addressing the demands of the subject area and discussing how different forms, styles, and registers of 
English are used for various purposes will benefit students. Providing students learning English as an additional language 
with ample opportunities to use English in communicative ways and designing classroom activities to aid language 
development through active language use will support their learning.
It’s essential to address barriers to equitable instruction and assessment for EAL students. By providing various ways for 
them to access content, demonstrate learning, and develop language skills, we can ensure their full participation and 
contribution to the classroom community. This approach not only benefits EAL students but also enhances the overall 
learning environment.
MUSIC LEARNING ENVIRONMENT 

KMUSA
ARTS EDUCATION
Kindergarten Music
Curriculum Guide



19
  K-3 MUSIC - MUSA  
KINDERGARTEN MUSIC (KMUSA) COURSE OVERVIEW
Course Description: KMUSA
Music is a language that we must explore and experience to fully understand its unique characteristics. This PEI 
elementary music curricula encourages using a sound before symbol, learner-centred process in which learners and 
music specialists engage in purposeful musical play. The learners will experience and demonstrate the grade level 
elements, concepts and skills using voice, body and instruments before identifying the musical language symbol. 
Formative elements, concepts, and skills will continue to be expanded upon throughout the elementary years. 
Foundational learnings need to be experienced and understood before moving onto more complex musical elements. 
The outcomes of the elementary music curriculum are categorized into the following 6 GCOs:
• Creating and Composing
• Musical Elements
• Musical Artistry
• Cultural Contexts and Connections
• Sharing and Performing
• Reflecting, Responding, & Analyzing
Kindergarten music learners will explore the musical elements by moving, using their various voices, dramatizing, 
visualizing, listening, improvising, composing, and playing instruments. Through such creative music making, learners 
will develop their early musical literacy skills. Learners will have experienced various levels of educational and musical 
opportunities before their kindergarten years. Through creative and imaginative play with the music specialist, 
learners will explore the kindergarten musical elements. At this age, learners are in the beginning stages of discovering 
music room protocols and procedures, their own and others importance within the music making process, and their 
foundational music language learnings that can be showcased as they are discovering new kindergarten musical 
elements.
The music making environment should be structured in a welcoming learner-centred way that empowers the creative 
spirit of the kindergarten learner. When instruments (pitched and/or non-pitched) are set up in advance by the teacher 
in the primary level learning space, there is more time for effective transitions and creative musical play. With such an 
engaging classroom set up, there are many opportunities for the music specialist and  learners to create, sing, move and 
play while exploring the kindergarten music elements. 
The music specialist engages with the learners in their music making, facilitating an atmosphere of imaginative, creative 
and critical inquiry-based musical play while nurturing a foundational understanding of the kindergarten musical 
elements. Such learning can be experienced through the exploration of favourite themes and daily life experiences 
using simple songs and/or nursery rhymes with very simple Orffestrations, storybooks and/or poems with sound stories, 
soundscapes, and/or sound carpets, word play/chain rhythm fun, activities and games. This music making process allows 
an opportunity for exploration of self and others, thus encouraging an environment fostering social emotional awareness 
and diversity, equity and inclusion.

20
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA   
Kindergarten Music (KMUSA) Course Overview
Outcome Summary
The outcomes of KMUSA are categorized into 6 GCOs. These GCOs and specific outcomes are designed to provide 
learners a holistic introduction to the skills and competencies needed for success. Each outcome, with its related 
achievement indicators and elaborations can be found on the following pages.
Table 4.  Summary of Curriculum Outcomes
GCOCodeSpecific Curriculum Outcome
Creating & 
Composing 
CC 1.1create music using their voice, body, and instruments through musical play.
CC 1.2compose simple musical ideas using invented notations and technology.
Musical 
Elements
ME 1demonstrate the elements of music through musical play.
Musical Artistry
MA 1.1demonstrate proper technique playing pitched and non-pitched percussion instruments.
MA 1.2demonstrate their voice in a variety of contexts through musical play.
Cultural 
Contexts & 
Connections
CCC 1
demonstrate an understanding of diverse musical genres, styles, and cultural contexts and 
connections through musical play.
Sharing & 
Performing
SP 1perform musical pieces for a variety of audiences.
Reflecting, 
Responding, & 
Analysing
RRA 1refine live and recorded performances using the creative musical process.

21
  K-3 MUSIC - MUSA  
Kindergarten Music (KMUSA) Course Overview
Instruments in the Primary Music Classroom
PitchedNon-Pitched
Metal:
* Glockenspiels - soprano and alto
* Metallophones - soprano, alto, and bass
Wood:
* Xylophones - soprano, alto, and bass
* Contrabass bars (diatonic scale)
Mallets for pitched instruments:
• 2 pairs per instrument
• specific to each instrument in a variety of 
sizes and types (wool, rubber, wooden)
Wood:
* Wood blocks (4)
* Rhythm sticks (class set) 
* Claves (4 pairs)
* Guiros (2) 
* Sandpaper blocks (5 pairs) 
* Temple blocks (1) 
* Vibraslap (1)
* Rain sticks (2)
* Castanets
* Cabasa 
Shakers: 
* Egg shakers (class set) 
* Maracas (10)
Miscellaneous:
* Slide whistle
* Ocean drum 
Metal:
* Tambourines (5) 
* Triangles (3) 
* Cow bells (1)
* Jingle bells (10)
* Finger cymbals (3)
* Agogo bells (1) 
* Wind chimes 
* Bell tree 
* Gong
* Spoons
Skin: 
* Hand drums (15)
* Tubanos (3)
* Bongo with stand (1)
* Gathering drum (1) 
* Thunder tube (1) 
Pentatonic Scales for Kindergarten Learners
Learners can sing, play and create beautiful 
music when pitched classroom instruments 
are set up in pentatonic patterns:
• C Pentatonic = C D E  G A (remove F & B)
• D Pentatonic = D E F#  A B (remove G & C)
• F Pentatonic = F G A  C D (remove B & E)
• G Pentatonic = G A B   D E (remove C & F)
Music Classroom Manipulatives and Tools
* ribbons
* scarves
* balls
* beanbags
* stretchy bands
* puppets/stuffed animals
* seasonal manipulatives
* small parachutes 
* whisper phones
* coloured blocks/LEGO pieces
* dinky cars
* Hoberman sphere
* Bingo chips
* circle "smartie" magnets
* nursery rhyme books
* classroom instrument pictures - cards/visuals
* song visuals
* story books
* hula hoops
* small/large interlocking foam mats
* student whiteboards
* smartboard/whiteboard with LCD projector

22
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA   
CC 1 .1
Learners are expected to ...
create music using their voice, body, and instruments through musical play.
RememberingUnderstandingApplyingAnalysingEvaluatingCreating
CREATING & COMPOSING: IMPROVISING

Citizenship 

Critical Thinking Personal-Career Development  Essential
Graduation
Competencies

Communication  

Technological Fluency  

Creativity and Innovation  
a. recognize musical patterns within music and their everyday environment to create simple musical ideas;
b. improvise with word chains/pre-rhythmic simple phrases;
c. improvise simple melodic phrases; and  
d. apply musical expression to their music making using articulation, dynamics and tone/timbre.
Learners who have achieved this outcome should be able to ...
Achievement Indicators
Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)
22

23
  K-3 MUSIC - MUSA  
 
           CREATING & COMPOSING:
            IMPROVISING
CC 1.1
Learners will intrinsically want to create their own musical patterns during the creative music making process. 
Through a sound before symbol, learner-centred approach, the beginning stages of creativity, improvisation, 
and composition begin to be explored at this kindergarten level. This is an exciting time for the learners 
exploring the musical language with the opportunity to showcase their own musical ideas using their voices, 
bodies and new classroom non-pitched and pitched instruments with their music specialist educator. The 
creating and composing process inspires the kindergarten learner to communicate and express who they are 
within the music, as well as where and how their creative musical ideas work within their group’s music making.
Simple Ideas for Improvising:
During the creative music making process, learners may draw inspiration from their favourite themes or daily 
life experiences while moving, singing, vocalizing, dramatizing, visualizing, listening, and playing instruments. 
Some improvisation ideas are:
• adding a melody to a spoken phrase using their voice(s) and pitched instruments (set in a pentatonic scale)
• writing a simple sentence and/or poem about daily experiences (first snowfall) then using the creative 
music making process to bring the poem to 