atingCreating

91
  K-3 MUSIC - MUSA  
           CREATING & COMPOSING:           DOCUMENTING
CC 1.2
Learners will explore how to document their musical creations with the music specialist. An audio or video 
recording can capture and preserve the learners’ creations in action, thus documenting their musical 
work. Grade three learners can also document their creations by using pictures, simple words, symbols, 
manipulatives, and/or rhythmic and melodic notation. When compositions are preserved and documented, 
learners can save them for future performance, reflection, and analysis.
Simple Ideas for Documenting:
It is important to allow learners ample opportunities in which to improvise and play with music. Learners may 
draw inspiration from various sources, including their daily life experiences or favourite themes. To continue to 
bring grade three learners to another level in the creative process, the music specialist can then guide learners 
toward more formal compositions that they can notate by themselves. Learners can notate their compositions 
using a variety of physical manipulatives and tools for showing invented and standard notation. At this level, 
there could be learners who will need less guidance and show great leadership with  fellow classmates.
Documenting ideas include:
• showing the shape of a created melody line using string, scarves, found objects and/or pipe cleaners
• notating a melody using bingo chips, magnets, and/or lego pieces on a three line staff and treble staff
• notating a rhythm pattern using iconic and standard notation, popsicle sticks, and/or pipe cleaners
• using invented symbols/graphic notation to represent expressive elements for a class-created soundscape
There are times when learners will experience more complex musical ideas than they can developmentally 
express in written form. Such improvisations can be recorded using videos or audio recordings to preserve the 
musical ideas, thereby creating a composition. It is important to continue the safe and warm music making 
environment during the recording process.
Favourite ManipulativesFavourite Tools
• string 
• pipe cleaners 
• scarves
• seasonal items 
• bingo chips
• circle “smartie” magnets 
• popsicle stick rhythms 
• classroom instrument pictures
• student whiteboards
• paper/pencil 
• smartboard/whiteboard with LCD 
projector
• treble clef floor staff
• treble clef student whiteboards
Elaborations

92
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA   
Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)
Learners who have achieved this outcome should be able to ...
Achievement Indicators
Citizenship 

Critical Thinking Personal-Career Development  Essential
Graduation
Competencies

Communication  

Technological Fluency  Creativity and Innovation  
a. demonstrate the elements of music using voice, body, and instruments;
b. demonstrate high Do-La-So-Fa-Mi-Re-Do with low La and low So melodic patterns;
c. play major and minor pentatonic scales in their music making;
d. demonstrate a simple canon/round;
e. demonstrate ostinato with voice, body, and instruments while maintaining a steady beat;
f. demonstrate accented notes and rhythms in their music making;
g. demonstrate crescendo and decrescendo dynamics;
h. demonstrate timbre using various voices, found sounds, recorder, ukulele, pitched and non-pitched 
classroom instruments;
i. demonstrate quarter note pulse, half note pulse, dotted half note pulse and/or whole note pulse;
j. describe the tempo within their music making;
k. demonstrate beamed sixteenth notes, dotted half note, and whole note rhythms plus whole note rest; 
l. demonstrate 2/ 4, 3/4, and 4/ 4 time signatures; 
m. demonstrate phrase, interlude and rondo form;
n. demonstrate fermata within their music making; 
o. play a simple crossover bordun accompaniment;
p. play BAG notes on soprano recorder; and 
q. play a basic chord accompaniment with soprano and/or concert ukulele . 
MUSICAL ELEMENTS
ME 1
Learners are expected to ...
demonstrate the elements of music through musical play.
RememberingUnderstandingApplyingAnalysingEvaluatingCreating

93
  K-3 MUSIC - MUSA  
           MUSICAL ELEMENTS
ME 1
Learners are expected to show their understanding of the musical elements through play using their voices, moving, 
dramatizing, visualizing, listening, and playing instruments. The grade three elements are discovered through the sound 
before symbol, learner-centred process in which learners and music specialists engage in active musical language play with a 
purpose. Such creative engagement with the musical language enables the learners to fully experience and demonstrate the 
elements before recognizing and identifying those same elements in their musical pieces. Foundational  elements learned 
at the kindergarten, grade one and two levels will provide the necessary understanding that supports the learning of new 
grade three musical elements.
Simple Ideas for Exploring the Musical Elements through Movement: 
Grade three learners enjoy active music making and should move often. Some movement ideas are:
• discovering So-La-Mi-Re-Do, high Do-La-So-Mi-Re-Do, So-Mi-Re-Do-La, high Do-La-So-Fa-Mi-Re-Do, and La-So-Mi-Re-Do 
with low La and low So melodic patterns with body scale and hand signs while singing
• discovering canon/round through chanting, body percussion,and playing instruments
• creating and layering sounds to discover articulation, timbre, and dynamic effects with voices, bodies (including 
dramatization) and instruments
• feeling the quarter note pulse, half note pulse , dotted half note pulse and/or whole note pulse
• using  bodies, voices, and instruments to explore crescendo/decrecendo dynamics, tempo and demonstrate phrase, 
interlude, and rondo form
• exploring rhythms using body percussion (snap/clap/pat/stamp) and/or the chair game - each chair represents a beat; 
learners are the rhythms (eg. one learner - quarter note on a chair and  two learners - eighth notes on a chair)
• exploring rhythm and melodic notation visuals, including rhythm flashcards, two -part scores, three lined staff, treble 
clef staff, and solfege ladder visuals with their voices and bodies.
Simple Ideas for Exploring the Musical Elements through instruments: 
Grade three learners should explore instrument patterns on their bodies before playing on the instruments. Some 
instrument playing ideas are:
• showing their proper posture, mallet position and gentle playing 
• exploring melodic contour and So-La-Mi-Re-Do, high Do-La-So-Mi-Re-Do, So-Mi-Re-Do-La, high Do-La-So-Fa-Mi-Re-Do, 
and La-So-Mi-Re-Do with low La and low So melodic patterns
• exploring accented notes and primary level rhythms while exploring 2/ 4, 3/ 4, and 4/ 4 time signatures 
• exploring tone and timbre by recognizing the distinctive qualities of skin, metal, wood, wind and string instruments 
while creating sound effects for a favourite activity, song, story and/or poem
• playing non-pitched and pitched percussion, recorder and ukulele instruments with Orffestrations 
• recognize and identify non-pitched and pitched percussion, recorder and ukulele classroom instruments
• exploring rhythm and melodic notation visuals, including rhythm flashcards, two-part rhythmic scores, three lined staff, 
Treble clef staff, solfege ladder, and instrument visuals using their voices,bodies and instruments
• exploring BAG notes and fingerings on soprano recorder with simple songs and games 
 Invented Rhythmic Notation Standard Rhythmic Notation Melodic Solfege Notation
* iconic theme rhythms
* “smartie” rhythms
* emoji rhythms
* animal rhythms
* food rhythms 
* color rhythms 
* shapes pre-rhythms
Grade 1 rhythms: 
   * quarter note (ta)
   * eighth notes -beamed (ti-ti/ta-di) 
   * quarter rest (sa/sh)
Grade 2 rhythms:
   * eighth notes - detached (ti-ti/ta-di)
   * half note (ta-a)
   * half  rest (Sa)
Grade 3 rhythms:
   * sixteenth notes - beamed (tikatika/     
       takadimi)
   * dotted half note (ta-a-a)
   * whole note (ta-a-a-a)/rest (sa-a-a-a)
high Do
Ti
La
So
Fa
Mi
Re
Do
low Ti
low La
low So
Elaborations

94
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA   
Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)
Learners who have achieved this outcome should be able to ...
Achievement Indicators
Citizenship 

Critical Thinking Personal-Career Development  Essential
Graduation
Competencies

Communication  

Technological Fluency  

Creativity and Innovation  
a. use proper posture, playing positions, and resting positions; 
b. play their instrument part accurately within a musical arrangement;
c. play an ostinato pattern while maintaining the steady beat; 
d. play a simple crossover bordun accompaniment on pitched percussion instruments;
e. play a basic chord accompaniment with soprano and/or concert ukulele; 
f. play BAG notes on soprano recorder; and 
g. demonstrate musical expression in their playing.
MUSICAL ARTISTRY: INSTRUMENTAL
MA 1 .1
Learners are expected to ...
demonstrate proper technique playing pitched/non-pitched percussion, string, and wind 
instruments. 
RememberingUnderstandingApplyingAnalysingEvaluatingCreating

95
  K-3 MUSIC - MUSA  
           MUSICAL ARTISTRY:           INSTRUMENTAL
MA 1.1
Learners will want to explore every instrument you showcase in your classroom. Grade three learners should 
understand that playing instruments is an integral part of musical learning at every level. Learners will 
demonstrate proper care and handling of instruments through musical play, mimicking the music specialist. 
Gentle care of all instruments should be demonstrated when playing, putting away, and passing to other 
friends. Proper instrument technique should be demonstrated throughout all creative music making, so 
learners can best express themselves musically.
Simple Ideas for Showcasing Classroom Instruments:
The music specialist should set up the instruments in advance to encourage effective transitions and a creative 
music making environment. Some instrument set-up ideas are:
• designing an inviting and easily accessible instrument area with lots of space for the learners to play
• creating different instrument layouts (circle, rows, scattered) to best explore various musical pieces 
• creating an easily accessible recorder and ukulele sitting (benches) and storage area  
Simple Ideas for Playing Instruments:
Learners and the music specialist will explore instrument playing by:
• experiencing all instrument patterns on their bodies using body percussion before placing on instruments
• practicing the proper instrument names and parts throughout the music making experience
• using specific words for playing instruments such as tapping, shaking, drumming, strumming, ghosting, and 
gently striking classroom instruments
Soprano Recorder Musical Play Ukulele Musical Play
Learners will demonstrate proper recorder play and 
rest by:
• mimicking the music specialist
• practicing how to pick, hold, carry, replace
• demonstrating proper playing position:
       *practicing how to sit, hold, and rest properly
       *using candle breath for quiet playing
       *playing with squishy fingers
       *using a proper embouchure 
• demonstrating beginner reading skills:
       *playing BAG with simple songs and games
       *reading recorder BAG fingering charts
       *reading rhythms with letter notes
       *discovering G, A then B on the Treble staff 
       *reading simple BAG melodies on the staff
Learners will demonstrate proper ukulele play and rest by:
• mimicking the music specialist and/or older friend
• practicing how to pick, hold, carry, replace
• practicing how to sit to play a gentle strum
• practicing how to place into rest position
• learning how to read chord charts
• playing a simple accompaniment chord with Hello/Goodbye 
Songs and Orffestrations
• using simple chords to play positive popular music pieces
•  using mindful, active listening ears to hear chord changes
The soprano and concert ukuleles are a great size for grade 
three level learners. Larger tenor, baritone, electric and u-bass 
ukuleles can be included in the elementary classroom to 
encourage popular music play.
Non-Pitched Instrument Musical Play Pitched Instrument Musical Play
Learners can demonstrate proper instrument play and 
rest by:
• mimicking the music specialist and/or friend
• practicing how to hold, carry, sit and/or stand, play 
gently, and show rest position to showcase best 
instrument practice
Learners can demonstrate proper instrument technique by:
• demonstrating proper posture position - crisscross, low/
high kneeling and standing
• demonstrating proper mallet handling: motorbike position 
with relaxed shoulders and slight forward lean
• demonstrating proper rest position: place mallets on 
head, shoulders, or knees 
• moving, dramatizing and singing simple chants during 
playing breaks to change instruments
Elaborations

96
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA   
Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)
Learners who have achieved this outcome should be able to ...
Achievement Indicators
Citizenship 

Critical Thinking Personal-Career Development  Essential
Graduation
Competencies

Communication  Technological Fluency  

Creativity and Innovation  
a. use proper breathing and vocal technique while singing;  
b. demonstrate in tune singing with simple major and minor melodies;
c. demonstrate singing high Do-La-So-Fa-Mi-Re-Do with low La and low So melodic patterns; 
d. demonstrate melodic contour with voice and body; and
e. demonstrate musical expression with their voices using articulation, dynamics and tone/timbre.
MUSICAL ARTISTRY: VOCAL
MA 1 .2
Learners are expected to ...
demonstrate their voice in a variety of contexts through musical play.
RememberingUnderstandingApplyingAnalysingEvaluatingCreating

97
  K-3 MUSIC - MUSA  
Learners will explore their various voices respectfully through creative musical play from a variety of cultures, 
including those of indigenous nations. Dramatizing daily life activities, nursery rhymes, simple songs, poems 
and stories encourages grade three learners to explore their voice using a wide range of emotions. Learners 
can be expected to sing in tune or very closely in tune at this grade three level with most being able to 
distinguish between in and out of tune singing. A few will still need guidance with this process. These learners 
will especially need to continue to mimic the music specialists' clear, in-tune singing voice to continue their 
exploration of matching pitch. The music specialist might need to adjust their own vocal range to model singing 
at their natural pitch range. Classroom pitched instruments, set up in advance for the grade three creative 
music making space, can be used as tools to encourage in-tune singing of all instrumental melodies while they 
are being played. This allows extra pitch practice and versatility in vocalizing with different instruments..  
Simple Ideas for Vocal Play:
Learners and the music specialist will explore their voices by:
• using visuals, manipulatives, and instruments to feel and visualize melodic contour while singing
• singing and moving using solfege hand signs and/or instruments to feel and visualize musical patterns: So-
La-Mi-Re-Do, high Do-La-So-Mi-Re-Do, So-Mi-Re-Do with low La, high Do-La-So-Fa-Mi-Re-Do, and La-So-Mi-
Re-Do with low La-and low So            
• singing, chanting, and/or dramatizing during playing breaks to feel the groove with their voices and bodies 
until it is their turn to play ag