behaviours that contribute to 
the well-being of self and others;
• build healthy personal and work 
relationships;
• establish skills and habits to pursue physical, 
spiritual, mental, and emotional well-being;
• develop strategies to manage career balance 
and wellness;
• create and implement a personal, education, 
career, and financial plan to support 
transitions and achievement of personal, 
education, and career goals; and
• demonstrate preparedness to learn 
and work individually, cooperatively, 
and collaboratively in diverse, evolving 
environments.
Creativity and InnovationCreativity and Innovation
Learners are expected to demonstrate openness to new experiences; to engage in creative 
processes; to make unexpected connections; and to generate new and dynamic ideas, techniques, 
and products.  They value aesthetic expression and appreciate the creative and innovative work of 
others.
Learners are expected to
• gather information through all senses to 
imagine, create, and innovate;
• develop and apply creative abilities to 
communicate ideas, perceptions, and 
feelings;
• take responsible risk, accept critical 
feedback, reflect, and learn from trial and 
error;
• think divergently, and embrace complexity 
and ambiguity;
• recognize that creative processes are vital to 
innovation;
• use creation techniques to generate 
innovations;
• collaborate to create and innovate;
• critically reflect on creative and innovative 
works and processes; and
• value the contribution of creativity and 
innovation.
CURRICULUM DESIGN

8
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA   
General Curriculum Outcomes
General curriculum outcome (GCO) statements articulate what students are expected to know and be able to do upon 
completion of study in K-6 Music. 
Table 1.  K-6 Music GCOs
GCODescription
Creating & 
Composing
Creating & Composing: Improvisation 
Creating and improvising is a natural result of the creative music making experience where learners 
are encouraged to add their own unique, critical thinking, and inquiry-based perspective. Exploring the 
elements of music at the elementary level using a sound before symbol process allows for simple stages 
of creativity, improvisation, and composition. It is important that the learning environments are set up 
in such a way that facilitates this intrinsic creativity that all learners possess. When the music classroom 
looks engaging and set to explore, move, and play, the learners and music specialist are able to creatively 
make music. There are many opportunities to create and compose a simple phrase while exploring 
different themes, songs, stories, poems, books, Orffestrations, musical centres, word play rhythm fun, 
and games based on the elements of music.
Creating & Composing: Documenting 
Preserving the learners simple original musical work through invented notations, standard notations 
and technology allows the created composition to be showcased. Primary/early elementary learners will 
focus on the use of invented notations easing into standard notations at their grade level. Learners at 
the grade 3 level should be comfortable continuing to compose with known rhythms on two and three 
lined staves before beginning their Treble Clef adventures that will continue into grades 4-6. Teachers are 
encouraged to explore different musical notation systems with their learners within cultural contexts. 
Musical 
Elements
The learner-centred, sound before symbol music making process will explore the grade level elements 
of music through moving, singing, dramatizing, visualizing, listening, and instrument playing thus 
encouraging an atmosphere of imaginative, creative and critical inquiry play. The learner will explore the 
musical elements, learning developmentally appropriate skills and concepts at each level. Those known 
elements can then be used as foundational learnings in order to add new grade level musical elements, 
concepts and skills to be experienced and understood. The learner should have a lot of experience 
creatively music making with foundational elements before being introduced to a new element.
Musical 
Artistry
Musical Artistry: Instrumental
The creative music making experience involves playing instruments while exploring the grade level 
elements of music through moving, singing, dramatizing, visualizing, and listening. Instruments are 
introduced in a developmentally appropriate way for the learner to experience from the Kindergarten 
level with additional instruments being added throughout their elementary years. Kindergarten through 
Grade 2 will explore the classroom non-pitched and pitched percussion instruments, Grade 3 will add the 
ukulele and recorder, and Grades 4-6 will add other ukuleles, guitars, keyboard, bucket drums and drum 
kit, as well as the exploration of a variety of instruments from a variety of cultures including those of 
indigenous nations. 
Musical Artistry: Vocal
Creative play with song, stories, and poems is experienced with all voices including calling, singing, 
whispering, speaking, chanting, rapping and the exploration of vocal skills from a variety of cultures 
including those of indigenous nations. Learners begin their exploration of their voice in Kindergarten 
through musical play. They explore pentatonic melodies throughout their elementary years, with 
additional exploration of diatonic and chromatic melodies in the older elementary grades. Singing and 
playing age appropriate instruments allows learners to hear melodies and harmonies while they are 
playing, giving an opportunity for greater awareness of pitch and vocal in-tune singing.
CURRICULUM DESIGN

9
  K-3 MUSIC - MUSA  
Cultural 
Contexts & 
All music has a cultural context and learners at this level can explore connections across different 
cultural traditions as well as their own social or cultural contexts. Exploring diverse musics from the very 
beginning of a learner’s school music experience offers a powerful opportunity to engage learners in 
exploration of the connections between peoples around the world and in their own communities, as well 
as to expand their musical palettes when they are still receptive to new and interesting sounds. This is a 
valuable opportunity both to celebrate and explore the diversity that may exist in your classroom, and to 
prepare your learners to be socially responsible citizens in a globalized world.
Sharing & 
Performing
It is important to explore performing in many forms to best share learners’ creative music making with 
others. Performances can take the form of an informance where classes are invited to a classroom to 
see a work in progress or a “finished” product of a work. They can be recorded via audio or video and 
showcased as a performance. Not having a set performance date makes this doable and shifts the focus 
on the process over the product, thereby allowing the focus to remain on the learner. Though it is not 
advised that Kindergarten learners are involved in big formal events, most learners from grades 1 - 6 
can explore the idea of a formal performance with a fixed date. It is important to balance the need for 
rehearsal in this setting and the need for the other creative and explorative activities.
Reflecting, 
Responding 
& 
Analyzing
Learners should explore the idea that reflecting, responding, and analyzing can occur in a number of 
musical contexts. Revisiting past performances and other recordings of performances encourages us 
to critically examine those musical creations. This allows learners to view their work from the eyes 
of the audience member, allowing them to grow in their own music making abilities to create even 
better musical performances. Throughout the elementary years, the learner will grow from very simple 
observations in the primary years to increasingly complex and unique critiquing of their own and others 
musical works in the later elementary years.
CURRICULUM DESIGN

10
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA   
Specific Curriculum Outcomes
Specific curriculum outcomes (SCOs) identify what students are expected to know and be able to do for a particular 
course. They provide a focus for instruction in terms of measurable or observable student performance and are the basis 
for the assessment of student achievement across the province. PEI specific curriculum outcomes are developed with 
consideration of Bloom’s Taxonomy of Learning and the Essential Graduation Competencies.
SCOs will begin with the phrase—Learners are expected to... .
Achievement Indicators (AIs)
Each specific curriculum outcome is described by a set of achievement indicators that support, define, and demonstrate
the depth and breadth of the corresponding SCO. 
Taken together as a set, AIs support the SCO in defining specific levels of knowledge acquired, skills applied, or attitudes 
demonstrated by a student for that particular outcome. It is important to note that AIs are not a prescriptive checklist to 
be taught in a sequential manner, are not a prioritized
list of instructional activities, and are not a set of prescribed assessment items. Achievement indicators provide clarity
and understanding to ensure instructional design is aligned to the SCO. 
The set of achievement indicators for a given outcome begins with the phrase—Learners who have achieved this
outcome should be able to... .
Elaborations
An elaboration provides a fuller description of the SCO and the instructional intent behind it. It provides a narrative for 
the SCO, gives background information where possible, and offers a broader context to help teachers gain a deeper 
understanding of the scope of the SCO. This may also include suggestions and/or reference supporting resources that 
may be helpful for instruction and assessment of the SCO.
CURRICULUM DESIGN

11
  K-3 MUSIC - MUSA  
Bloom’s Taxonomy
Bloom’s Taxonomy was published in 1956 as a framework for the purpose of classifying expectations for student learning 
as indicated by educational outcomes. David Krathwohl’s 2002 revision of this taxonomy expands on the original work by 
defining the relationship between the cognitive process dimension—how we expect students to come to know and think 
about the outcome—and the knowledge dimension—the category of knowledge expressed by the outcome.
A full understanding of the relationship between the cognitive process and knowledge dimensions of Bloom’s Taxonomy 
will serve students, teachers, and administrators by 
• providing a framework for developing the specific curriculum outcomes (SCOs) for a particular course;
• identifying the type of knowledge and cognitive target of the outcome;
• providing a means for the alignment of specific curriculum outcomes with instructional activities and assessments; 
and
• providing a common language about the curriculum outcomes within all subjects to facilitate communication.
Cognitive Process Dimension
The cognitive process dimension classifies six types of cognition that learners may be expected to demonstrate or use 
as they work towards proficiency of any given specific curriculum outcome. The verb(s) that begins a specific curriculum 
outcome identifies the cognitive process dimension.
Table 2.  Bloom’s Taxonomy—Cognitive Process Dimension
CategoryDescription
RememberingRetrieve, recall, and/or recognize specific information or knowledge from memory.
UnderstandingConstruct meaning from different sources and types of information, and explain ideas and 
concepts.
ApplyingImplement or apply information to complete a task, carry out a procedure through executing or 
implementing knowledge.
AnalysingBreak information into component parts and determine how the parts relate or interrelate to one 
another or to an overall structure or purpose.
EvaluatingJustify a decision or course of action, problem solve, or select materials and/or methods based on 
criteria and standards through checking and critiquing.
CreatingForm a coherent functional whole by skillfully combining elements together and generating new 
knowledge to guide the execution of the work.
CURRICULUM DESIGN

12
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA   
SCO Structure
Examining the structure of a specific curriculum outcome is necessary to fully understand its intent prior to planning 
instruction and assessment. The verb(s) in the outcome relates to the expected level and type of thinking (cognitive 
process). A noun or noun phrase communicates the type of knowledge (i.e., factual, conceptual, procedural, or 
metacognitive) that is the focus of the outcome.
MA 1.1—demonstrate proper technique playing pitched/non-pitched percussion, string, and wind instruments.
Curriculum Guide Layout
The curriculum guide layout is designed to highlight the critical elements/features of the provincial curriculum required 
for a given course.
Table 3.  Details of Curriculum Guide Layout
FeatureDescription
Unit NameAppears in the upper left hand corner.
SCO BlockAppears in the coloured box; contains the cognitive process level
AI ListAppears in the body of the page immediately following the SCO.
EGC MapAppears at the bottom of the page.
CURRICULUM DESIGN
verb: demonstrate; cognitive process: APPLYING

13
  K-3 MUSIC - MUSA  
Set of achievement 
indicators (AIs)indicating 
“breadth and depth” of 
SCO 
Cognitive process 
level for this 
particular SCO
Specific curriculum 
outcome (SCO)
Essential Graduation 
Competencies Map
Name of 
Curriculum Unit
CURRICULUM DESIGN
90
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA
Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)
Learners who have achieved this outcome should be able to ...
Achievement Indicators
Citizenship 

Critical Thinking Personal-Career Development  Essential
Graduation
Competencies

Communication  

Technological Fluency

Creativity and Innovation
a  use proper posture, playing positions, and resting positions; 
b  play their instrument part accurately within a musical arrangement;
c  play an ostinato pattern while maintaining the steady beat; 
d  play a simple crossover bordun accompaniment on pitched percussion instruments;
e  play a basic chord accompaniment with soprano and/or concert ukulele; 
f  play BAG notes on soprano recorder; and 
g  demonstrate musical expression in their playing.
MUSICAL ARTISTRY: INSTRUMENTAL
MA 1 .1
Learners are expected to ...
demonstrate proper technique playing pitched/non-pitched percussion, string, and wind 
instruments.
 
RememberingUnderstandingApplyingAnalysingEvaluatingCreating

14
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA   
Assessment and Evaluation
Assessment and evaluation are integral components of the teaching and 
learning process. They are continuous activities that are planned for 
and derived from specific curriculum outcomes (SCOs) and should be 
consistent with instruction. Effectively planned assessment and evaluation 
improves and guides future instruction. It also promotes learning, builds 
confidence, and develops students’ understanding of themselves as 
learners. 
Assessment is the process of gathering evidence about student learning. 
Assessments need to be reflective of the cognitive process and type of 
knowledge indicated by the SCO (“Bloom’s Taxonomy” on page 6). The 
achievement indicators inform teachers of the depth and breadth of skills, 
knowledge, and understandings expected for each SCO.
Assessment has three interrelated purposes:
• assessment for learning to guide and inform instruction (formative)
• assessment as learning to involve students in self-assessment and setting goals for their own l