
• using their bodies and voices to explore tempo within their music making
• moving to music to demonstrate ABC form
• using body percussion (snap/clap/pat/stamp) to explore rhythms within the musical language 
Simple Ideas for Exploring the Musical Elements through Instruments: 
Grade two learners should explore musical patterns with their voices and bodies before playing on the 
instruments. Some instrument playing ideas are:
• showing their proper posture, mallet position and gentle playing 
• choosing instruments to create sounds effects for a favourite activity/song
• exploring quarter note pulse and/or half note pulse
• exploring solfege and melodic contour on pitched instruments
• exploring accented notes and rhythms
• exploring forte and piano dynamics 
• exploring tone and timbre by recognizing the distinctive qualities of skin, metal, and wood instruments
• transferring word syllable patterns to body percussion and instruments
• playing non-pitched and pitched classroom instrument accompaniments to increasingly complex Orffestrations
• recognizing and identifying non-pitched and pitched percussion classroom instruments
• using instruments to play rhythms and melodies written in invented or standard notation
• exploring 2, 3, and 4 beat metre 
 Invented Rhythmic Notation Standard Rhythmic Notation Melodic Solfege Notation
* iconic theme rhythms
* “smartie” rhythms
* LEGO pieces
* emoji rhythms
* animal rhythms
* food rhythms 
* color rhythms 
* shapes pre-rhythms
Grade 1 rhythms: 
* quarter note (ta)
* eighth notes -beamed (ti-ti/ta-di) 
* quarter rest (sa/sh)
Grade 2 rhythms:
* eighth notes - detached (ti-ti/ta-di)
* half note (ta-a)
* half  rest (Sa)
Do'
Ti
La
So
Fa
Mi
Re
Do
           MUSICAL ELEMENTS
ME 1
Elaborations

72
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA   
Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)
Learners who have achieved this outcome should be able to ...
Achievement Indicators
Citizenship 

Critical Thinking Personal-Career Development  Essential
Graduation
Competencies

Communication  

Technological Fluency  

Creativity and Innovation  
a. use proper posture, playing positions, and resting positions; 
b. play their instrument part accurately within a musical arrangement;
c. play an ostinato pattern while maintaining the steady beat; 
d. play a simple broken bordun accompaniment; and 
e. demonstrate musical expression in their playing.
MUSICAL ARTISTRY: INSTRUMENTAL
MA 1 .1
Learners are expected to ...
 demonstrate proper technique playing pitched and non-pitched percussion instruments.
RememberingUnderstandingApplyingAnalysingEvaluatingCreating

73
  K-3 MUSIC - MUSA  
           MUSICAL ARTISTRY:           INSTRUMENTAL
MA 1.1
Learners will want to explore every instrument you showcase in the music classroom. Grade two learners 
should understand that playing instruments is an integral part of musical learning at every level. Learners will 
demonstrate proper care and handling of instruments through musical play, mimicking the music specialist. 
Gentle care of all instruments should be demonstrated when playing, putting away, and passing to other 
friends. Proper instrument technique should be demonstrated throughout all creative music making, so 
learners can best express themselves musically.
Simple Ideas for Showcasing Classroom Instruments:
The music specialist should set up the instruments in advance to encourage effective transitions and a creative 
music making environment. Some instrument set-up ideas are:
• designing an inviting and cozy instrument area with enough room for the learners own space bubble
• creating different instrument layouts (circle, rows, scattered) to best explore various musical pieces
• using small/large mats and hula hoops to categorize instruments and effectively manage instrument 
transitions
Simple Ideas for Playing Instruments:
Learners and the music specialist will explore instrument playing by:
• experiencing all musical patterns with body percussion before placing those patterns on the instruments
• practicing the proper instrument names throughout the music making experience
• using specific words for playing instruments such as tapping, shaking, drumming and gently striking 
classroom instruments
• repeating simple songs and chants, such as "Move on over" and/or "Instrument on your head" while 
moving to a new instrument
• encouraging learners to air strum and/or feel the simple chord C (C tuning) or D (D tuning) with their 
fingers with their imaginary ukulele while the music specialist plays during Hello and Goodbye songs
Non-Pitched Instrument Musical Play Pitched Instrument Musical Play
Learners can demonstrate proper instrument play 
and rest by:
• mimicking the music specialist, puppet and/
or friend
• practicing how to hold and carry an 
instrument
• practicing how to sit properly 
• practicing how to play gently and place into 
rest position
Learners can demonstrate proper instrument 
technique by:
• demonstrating proper posture position (depends 
on size of child):
* crisscross - glockenspiels
* low kneeling - soprano & alto 
metallophones/xylophones 
* high kneeling/standing - bass bars/ 
metallophones/xylophones
• demonstrating proper mallet handling: 
motorbike position with relaxed shoulders and 
slight forward lean
• demonstrating proper rest position: place mallets 
on head, shoulders, or knees 
• moving, dramatizing and singing during playing 
breaks to remain engaged
Elaborations

74
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA   
Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)
Learners who have achieved this outcome should be able to ...
Achievement Indicators
Citizenship 

Critical Thinking Personal-Career Development  Essential
Graduation
Competencies

Communication  Technological Fluency  

Creativity and Innovation  
a. use proper breathing and vocal technique while singing;  
b. demonstrate in tune singing with simple melodies;
c. demonstrate singing Mi-Re-Do, So-Mi-Re-Do, So-Mi-Do, and So-Mi-La-Do melodic patterns;
d. demonstrate melodic contour with voice and body; and
e. demonstrate musical expression with their voices using articulation, dynamics and tone/timbre.
MUSICAL ARTISTRY: VOCAL
MA 1 .2
Learners are expected to ...
demonstrate their voice in a variety of contexts through musical play.
RememberingUnderstandingApplyingAnalysingEvaluatingCreating

75
  K-3 MUSIC - MUSA  
Learners will explore their various voices respectfully through creative musical play. Dramatizing daily life 
activities, nursery rhymes, simple songs, poems and stories encourages grade two learners to explore their 
voice using a wide range of emotions. Learners will mimic the music specialists clear, in-tune singing voice to 
continue their exploration of matching pitch. The music specialist might need to adjust their own vocal range 
to model singing at the learners natural pitch range. Classroom pitched instruments, set up in advance for the 
grade two creative music making space, can be used as tools to encourage in-tune singing. The learner's voice 
is still developing, so in-tune singing is in the discovery stage. 
Simple Ideas for Vocal Play:
Learners and the music specialist will explore their voices by:
• using visuals, manipulatives, and instruments to feel and visualize melodic contour while singing
• singing and moving using solfege hand signs and/or instruments to feel and visualize  Mi-Re-Do, So-Mi-Re-
Do, So-Mi-Do, and So-Mi-La-Do                                           
• singing, chanting, and/or dramatizing during playing breaks to feel the groove with their voices and bodies 
until it is their turn to play again 
• creating and layering sounds to discover articulation, timbre, and dynamic effects with movement and 
instruments
• demonstrating forte and piano dynamics with movement
• experiencing tempo within their music making through movement
• experiencing word play with grade two rhythms using body percussion and instruments
• experiencing the parts of an Orffestration with body percussion before playing on instruments
 Musical Play for Developing Vocal Technique
Learners can demonstrate proper vocal play and rest by:
• mimicking their music specialist and/or a friend (sit a struggling singer beside a strong one)
• practicing how to breathe (hands on belly - 3 breaths in/out) while sitting and standing tall 
• using proper names for their voices 
• practicing how to sing beautifully while playing instruments quietly
           MUSICAL ARTISTRY: VOCAL
MA 1.2
Elaborations

76
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA   
Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)
Learners who have achieved this outcome should be able to ...
Achievement Indicators

Citizenship 

Critical Thinking Personal-Career Development  Essential
Graduation
Competencies

Communication  Technological Fluency  Creativity and Innovation  
a. use musical play to experience songs, chants, games, and dances from a variety of cultural contexts;
b. listen and respond to music from a variety of languages, genres, styles, and cultural contexts;
c. identify grade two musical elements and patterns reflected in a variety of musical traditions;  
d. describe music within their daily lives; 
e. describe their own cultural musical experiences as well as those of their fellow learners and community; and
f. describe connections between music from a variety of cultural contexts. 
CULTURAL CONTEXTS & CONNECTIONS
CCC 1
Learners are expected to ...
demonstrate an understanding of diverse musical genres, styles, and cultural contexts 
and connections through musical play.
RememberingUnderstandingApplyingAnalysingEvaluatingCreating

77
  K-3 MUSIC - MUSA  
           
CULTURAL CONTEXTS 
           & CONNECTIONS
CCC 1
Learners will explore genres, styles, cultural contexts and connections through musical play. All known 
kindergarten, grade one and new grade two elements should be explored in their everyday music making by 
regularly choosing songs, listening selections, games, and activities from a variety of diverse resources. It is 
vitally important to seek out resources that have been created by or with the involvement of a member of 
the culture or tradition represented. 
Culturally responsive teaching is an intentional process of getting to know your students, how they learn, and 
what is important to them, and creating an environment for learning that values those things. Music is deeply 
tied to culture. Incorporating a variety of diverse musical traditions into your teaching is a meaningful way to 
practice culturally responsive teaching in the music room. The exploration of diverse musics from the beginning 
of a learners' school music experience enables the discovery of connections between peoples around the world 
and in their own communities. It encourages the opportunity to experience the role that music plays in their 
own lives, and helps expand their musical palettes while they are still receptive to new and interesting sounds. 
This is a powerful opportunity both to celebrate and explore the diversity that already exists in your classroom, 
and to prepare your learners to be socially responsible citizens in a globalized world.
Three Elements of Meaningful In-Depth Explorations of Diverse Musical Traditions
Experiencing Music with a Culture Bearer
The most effective ways to bring music from any tradition into your music room include:
• inviting a guest musician or culture bearer into your classroom to share their knowledge and lived 
experiences
• using video performances and interviews to provide the next best “immersion” experience for your 
learners (if a guest is not possible) 
• using audio performances and interviews with photographs provided for visual context
When it comes to musics that are not our own, we are far from experts, so we should look to those who are! 
Adopt a mindset of being an “explorer” of new musics along with your learners, and seek out resources that 
were made by or in consultation with a member of that culture to help ensure you are being respectful and 
sharing the music appropriately.
Context and Opportunity for Connection
Help your learners make connections with their own lived experiences and build empathy by:
• placing music within its sociocultural context 
• sharing stories and picture books
• celebrating holidays
• exploring a message or shared experience with which your learners can connect
What similarities can learners find between this musical tradition and their own lives? What connections 
can they make to other music they’ve explored? Learners at this level can identify shared experiences across 
cultural traditions, such as the common experiences of dancing at a celebration or singing lullabies to babies, 
and are often eager to share their own.
Active Engagement and Music Making
Provide active music making opportunities for you and your learners to explore and engage with all musics to 
interact and create deeper connections with the music they are exploring, including:
• participatory community dances with simple steps
• call and response or simple repetitive songs in their original language
• rhythms that can be recreated on classroom instruments when authentic instruments are not available
When possible, try to mimic the transmission processes of the musical tradition. Do they learn music by rote? 
Do they participate in group improvisation? Use this as a chance to try something new!
Elaborations

78
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA   
Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)
Learners who have achieved this outcome should be able to ...
Achievement Indicators

Citizenship 

Critical Thinking Personal-Career Development  Essential
Graduation
Competencies

Communication  

Technological Fluency  

Creativity and Innovation  
a. perform their music  with each other within their classroom environment;
b. perform their music with others in informal settings; 
c. perform their music with others in simple, short and small formal settings; and
d. demonstrate performance etiquette both as a performer or audience member.
SHARING & PERFORMING 
SP 1
Learners are expected to ...
perform musical pieces for a variety of audiences.
RememberingUnderstandingApplyingAnalysingEvaluatingCreating

79
  K-3 MUSIC - MUSA  
           SHARING & PERFORMING
SP 1
Learners are expected to share their musical pieces with one another, their teacher, school, parents and 
community. This creating and sharing presentation process requires much social interaction. The many aspects 
of music making (movement, singing, dramatization, and playing instruments) allows individuals to play their 
favourite part in the sharing process. Sharing their most comfortable musical gifts with others in smaller 
and increasingly larger settings will help grade two learners develop their understanding that this is a very 
important step in their music making process.
Simple Collaborative Skills for Best Music Making, Sharing and Performing:
Learners gain an understanding of the importance of working with others in the creating and sharing music 
making process by:
• showing positive creative musical play
• respecting their own and others' space bubble 
• applying self-regulation skills
• applying social-emotional skills
• actively listening to others
• learning their sense of place and purpose within the musical experience
Grade two learners will develop an important sense of who they uniquely are and where they uniquely fit 
within their class through the sharing and performing experience. The process of 