life
• exploring the different characteristics of sound of all classroom instruments (timbre) and dynamics (loud 
and quiet) to create a sound story and/or soundscape
FavouriteThemesFavourite Activities
• weather
• celebrations
• animals
• friends
• family
• sports
• treats
• food
• shapes
• hobbies
• seasons
• emojis
Create a SOUNDSTORY:
• add chosen pitched and non-pitched instruments, found sounds, vocal 
sounds, dramatization, and movements to represent the characters or 
actions in a story and/or poem
Create a SOUNDSCAPE:
• explore favourite themes, such as a thunderstorm, using instruments, found 
sounds, vocal sounds, dramatization and movement to re-create how the 
storm would sound from beginning to end
Create a WORD PLAY/CHAIN COMPOSITION:
• explore favourite theme visuals to create pre-rhythmic phrases with 
movement, dramatization, vocalization, and instruments
• create a simple four-beat chant using words based on a theme which can 
then be transferred to body percussion and/or instruments
Elaborations

24
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA   
Citizenship 

Critical Thinking Personal-Career Development  Essential
Graduation
Competencies

Communication  Technological Fluency  

Creativity and Innovation  
a. use manipulatives and tools to represent sounds and syllables, dynamics and tone/timbre with their created 
musical patterns; 
b. demonstrate simple word chains/pre-rhythmic phrases visually; and
c. demonstrate simple melodic phrases visually.
CREATING & COMPOSING: DOCUMENTING
CC 1 .2
Learners are expected to ...
compose simple musical ideas using invented notations and technology.
RememberingUnderstandingApplyingAnalysingEvaluatingCreating
Learners who have achieved this outcome should be able to ...
Achievement Indicators
Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)

25
  K-3 MUSIC - MUSA  
           CREATING & COMPOSING:           DOCUMENTING
CC 1.2
Learners will explore how to document their musical creations with the music specialist. An audio or video 
recording can capture and preserve the learners’ creations in action, thus documenting their musical 
work. Kindergarten learners can also document their creations by using pictures, simple words, symbols, 
manipulatives, and/or pre-rhythmic and melodic invented notation with a few simple ideas. When 
compositions are preserved and documented, learners can save them for future performance, reflection, and 
analysis.
Simple Ideas for Documenting:
It is important to allow learners ample opportunities in which to improvise and play with music. Learners 
may draw inspiration from their daily life experiences or favourite themes. To bring Kindergarten learners 
to another level in the creative process, the music specialist can then guide learners toward more formal 
compositions that learners notate themselves. Learners can notate their compositions using a variety of 
physical manipulatives and tools for showing invented notation.
Documenting ideas include:
• showing the shape of a created melody line of the music using string, scarves, and/or pipe cleaners 
• notating a melody using bingo chips, magnets, and/or LEGO pieces
• notating a word chain/pre-rhythmic pattern using iconic notation, blocks/LEGO pieces, dinky cars, and/or 
pipe cleaners 
• using invented symbols/graphic notation to represent expressive elements for a class-created soundscape
There are times when learners will experience more complex musical ideas than they can developmentally 
express in written form. Such improvisations can be recorded using videos or audio recordings to preserve the 
musical ideas, thereby creating a composition. It is important to continue the safe and warm music making 
environment during the recording process.
Favourite ManipulativesFavourite Tools
• string 
• pipe cleaners 
• scarves
• seasonal items 
• dinky cars
• coloured blocks/LEGO pieces
• Bingo chips
• circle “smartie” magnets 
• classroom instrument pictures
• student whiteboards
• smartboard/whiteboard with LCD 
projector
Elaborations

26
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA   
Citizenship 

Critical Thinking Personal-Career Development  Essential
Graduation
Competencies

Communication  

Technological Fluency  Creativity and Innovation  
a. demonstrate the elements of music using voice, body, instruments, and manipulatives;
b. demonstrate high and low melodic patterns and melodic contour; 
c. demonstrate steady beat with voice, body and instruments;
d. demonstrate smooth and separated articulation;
e. demonstrate loud and quiet dynamics; 
f. demonstrate timbre using various voices, found sounds, and instruments;
g. demonstrate fast and slow tempos within their music making; 
h. demonstrate simple pre-rhythm word patterns through speech, body percussion and non-pitched 
instruments; 
i. demonstrate sound and silence;
j. demonstrate simple phrases plus same and different form; and 
k. play simple musical patterns using proper instrument and mallet technique.
MUSICAL ELEMENTS
ME 1
Learners are expected to ...
demonstrate the elements of music through musical play.
RememberingUnderstandingApplyingAnalysingEvaluatingCreating
Learners who have achieved this outcome should be able to ...
Achievement Indicators
Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)

27
  K-3 MUSIC - MUSA  
           MUSICAL ELEMENTS
ME 1
Learners are expected to show their understanding of the musical elements through play using their voices, 
moving, dramatizing, visualizing, listening, and playing instruments. The kindergarten elements are discovered 
through the sound before symbol, learner-centred process in which learners and music specialists engage 
in active purposeful musical play. Such creative engagement with the musical language enables the learners 
to fully experience and demonstrate the elements before recognizing and identifying those same elements 
in their musical pieces. Those musical elements learned at the kindergarten level will provide the necessary 
experiential understanding that creates a necessary musical language foundation for subsequent primary and 
elementary grade level musical elements .
Simple Ideas for Exploring the Musical Elements through Movement: 
Kindergarten learners enjoy active music making and should move often. Some movement ideas are: 
• discovering high and low plus melodic contour (pitch going up and down) using the body while singing
• exploring actions and dance movements to simple songs while singing
• exploring letter and/or number shapes while singing
• creating and layering sounds to discover articulation, timbre, and dynamic effects with voices, bodies  and 
instruments
• dramatizing the characters in a story and/or poem to explore timbre
• feeling the steady beat, smooth and separated articulation, fast and slow tempos, rest/space in the music
• moving to music to discover same and different phrase and form 
• using body percussion (snap/clap/pat/stamp) to explore pre-rhythmic word play within the musical 
language 
Simple Ideas for Exploring the Musical Elements through Instruments: 
Kindergarten learners should explore instrument patterns on their bodies before playing on the instruments. 
Some instrument playing ideas are:
• showing their proper posture, mallet position and gentle playing 
• choosing instruments to create sounds effects for a favourite activity/song
• exploring high and low plus melodic contour on instruments while singing
• exploring smooth and separated articulation plus quiet and loud dynamics 
• exploring tone and timbre by recognizing the distinctive qualities of skin, metal, and wood instruments
• transferring word syllable patterns to body percussion and instruments
• playing and counting the number(s) in a song, poem and/or story
• playing non-pitched and pitched classroom instrument accompaniments to simple Orffestrations
• recognizing and identifying non-pitched and pitched percussion classroom instruments
•  using instruments to play pre-rhythmic and melodic word play written in invented notation
 Invented Rhythmic Notation Standard Rhythmic Notation Melodic Solfege Notation
*  iconic theme rhythms
*  “smartie” rhythms
* coloured blocks/LEGO pieces
* emoji rhythms
* animal rhythms
* food rhythms 
* color rhythms 
* shapes pre-rhythms
 Experiencing pre-rhythmic word 
play patterns using invented 
rhythmic notation (left column) 
allows learners to visually  
demonstrate the number of 
syllables in each word. This word 
investigation allows for a seamless 
connection to standard notation in 
Grade 1.   
Experiencing and demonstrating 
high/low plus melodic contour 
allows learners to be ready for a 
seamless connection to solfege 
in Grade 1. 
Elaborations

28
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA   
Citizenship 

Critical Thinking Personal-Career Development  Essential
Graduation
Competencies

Communication  

Technological Fluency  

Creativity and Innovation  
a. use proper posture, playing positions, and resting positions; 
b. play their instrument part accurately within a musical arrangement;
c. play a pre-rhythmic word pattern while trying to maintain the steady beat;
d. play a simple colour part accompaniment;
e. play steps, skips, repeated notes and simple glissandi on pitched instruments; and 
f. demonstrate musical expression in their playing.
MUSICAL ARTISTRY: INSTRUMENTAL
MA 1 .1
Learners are expected to ...
demonstrate proper technique playing pitched and non-pitched percussion instruments. 
RememberingUnderstandingApplyingAnalysingEvaluatingCreating
Learners who have achieved this outcome should be able to ...
Achievement Indicators
Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)

29
  K-3 MUSIC - MUSA  
           MUSICAL ARTISTRY:           INSTRUMENTAL
MA 1.1
Learners will want to explore every instrument you showcase in the music classroom. Kindergarten learners will 
discover that playing instruments is an integral part of musical learning. Learners will explore proper care and 
handling of instruments through musical play, mimicking the music specialist. Gentle care of all instruments is 
necessary to practice when playing, putting away, and passing to other friends. Proper instrument technique 
should be encouraged and practiced throughout all creative music making, so learners can best express 
themselves musically.
Simple Ideas for Showcasing Classroom Instruments:
The music specialist should set up the instruments in advance to encourage effective transitions and a creative 
music making environment. Some instrument set-up ideas are:
• designing an inviting and cozy instrument area with enough room for the learners own space bubble
• creating different instrument layouts (circle, rows, scattered) to best explore various musical pieces
• using small/large mats and hula hoops to categorize instruments and effectively manage instrument 
transitions
Simple Ideas for Playing Instruments:
Learners and the music specialist will explore instrument playing by:
• experiencing all instrument patterns with body percussion before placing those patterns on the 
instruments
• practicing the proper instrument names throughout the music making experience
• using specific words for playing instruments such as tapping, shaking, drumming and gently striking 
classroom instruments
• repeating simple songs and chants, such as "Move on over" and/or "Instrument on your head" while 
moving to a new instrument
• encouraging learners to air strum their imaginary ukulele while the music specialist plays during Hello and 
Goodbye songs.
Non-Pitched Instrument Musical Play Pitched Instrument Musical Play
Learners can demonstrate proper instrument play 
and rest by:
• mimicking the music specialist, puppet and/
or friend
• practicing how to hold and carry an 
instrument
• practicing how to sit properly 
• practicing how to play gently and place into 
rest position
Learners can demonstrate proper instrument 
technique by:
• demonstrating proper posture position (depends 
on size of child):
* crisscross - glockenspiels
* low kneeling - soprano & alto 
metallophones/xylophones 
* high kneeling/standing - bass bars/ 
metallophones/xylophones
• demonstrating proper mallet handling: 
motorbike position with relaxed shoulders and 
slight forward lean
• demonstrating proper rest position: place mallets 
on head, shoulders, or knees 
• moving, dramatizing and singing during playing 
breaks to remain engaged
Elaborations

30
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA   
Citizenship 

Critical Thinking Personal-Career Development  Essential
Graduation
Competencies

Communication  Technological Fluency  

Creativity and Innovation  
a. use proper breathing and vocal technique while singing; 
b. demonstrate their calling, singing, whispering, speaking, chanting and rapping voices within their music 
making; 
c. demonstrate in tune beginner singing with simple melodies;
d. demonstrate singing high and low melodic patterns;
e. demonstrate melodic contour with voice and body; and
f. demonstrate musical expression with their voices using articulation/duration, dynamics and tone/timbre
MUSICAL ARTISTRY: VOCAL
MA 1 .2
Learners are expected to ...
demonstrate their voice in a variety of contexts through musical play.
RememberingUnderstandingApplyingAnalysingEvaluatingCreating
Learners who have achieved this outcome should be able to ...
Achievement Indicators
Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)

31
  K-3 MUSIC - MUSA  
Learners will explore their various voices respectfully through creative musical play. Dramatizing daily life 
activities, nursery rhymes, simple songs, poems and stories encourages kindergarten learners to explore their 
voice using a wide range of emotions. Learners will mimic the music specialist’s clear, in-tune singing voice to 
begin their exploration of matching pitch. The music specialist might need to adjust their own vocal range to 
model singing at the learners natural pitch range. Classroom pitched instruments, set up in advance for the 
kindergarten creative music making space, can be used as tools to encourage in-tune singing. The learner's 
voice is still developing, so in-tune singing is in the discovery stage. 
Simple Ideas for Vocal Play:
Learners and the music specialist will explore their voices by:
• using visuals, manipulatives, and instruments to feel and visualize melodic contour while singing
• singing while moving ones body and/or instruments to feel and visualize high and low                     
• singing, chanting, and/or dramatizing during playing breaks to feel the groove with their voices and bodies 
until it is their turn to play again 
• creating and layering sounds to discover articulation, timbre, and dynamic effects with movement and 
instruments
• demonstrating loud and quiet dynamics with movement
• experiencing fast and slow tempos with movement
• experiencing smooth and separated sounds with movement 
• experiencing word play with kindergarten pre-rhythmic invented notation using body percussion and 
instruments
• experiencing the simple parts of an Orffestration with body percussion before playing on instruments
 Musical Play for Developing Vocal Technique
Learners can demonstrate proper vocal play and rest by:
• practicing how to use all voices respectfully with a special “voices” puppet/stuffy (including “solo” voice)
• mimicking their music specialist and/or a friend (sit a struggling singer beside a strong one)
• practicing how to breathe (hands on belly - 3 breaths in/out) while sitting and standing tall 
• using proper names for their voices 
•