 practicing how to sing beautifully while playing instruments quietly
           MUSICAL ARTISTRY: VOCAL
MA 1.2
Elaborations

32
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA   

Citizenship 

Critical Thinking Personal-Career Development  Essential
Graduation
Competencies

Communication  Technological Fluency  Creativity and Innovation  
a. use musical play to experience songs, chants, games, and dances from a variety of cultural contexts;
b. listen and respond to music from a variety of languages, genres, styles, and cultural contexts;
c. identify kindergarten musical elements and patterns reflected in a variety of musical traditions;  
d. describe music within their daily lives; 
e. describe their own cultural musical experiences as well as those of their fellow learners and community; and
f. describe connections between musics from a variety of cultural contexts. 
CULTURAL CONTEXTS & CONNECTIONS
CCC 1
Learners are expected to ...
demonstrate an understanding of diverse musical genres, styles, and cultural contexts 
and connections through musical play.
RememberingUnderstandingApplyingAnalysingEvaluatingCreating
Learners who have achieved this outcome should be able to ...
Achievement Indicators
Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)

33
  K-3 MUSIC - MUSA  
           
CULTURAL CONTEXTS 
           & CONNECTIONS
CCC 1
Learners will explore genres, styles, cultural contexts and connections through musical play. All kindergarten 
elements should be explored in their everyday music making by regularly choosing songs, listening selections, 
games, and activities from a variety of diverse resources. It is vitally important to seek out resources that 
have been created by or with the involvement of a member of the culture or tradition represented. 
Culturally responsive teaching is an intentional process of getting to know your students, how they learn, 
and what is important to them, and creating an environment for learning that values those things. Music is 
deeply tied to culture. Incorporating a variety of diverse musical traditions into your teaching is a meaningful 
way to practice culturally responsive teaching in the music room. The exploration of diverse musics from 
the beginning of a learners' school music experience enables the discovery of connections between peoples 
around the world and in their own communities. It encourages the opportunity to experience the role that 
music plays in their own lives, and helps expand their musical palettes while they are still receptive to new 
and interesting sounds. This is a powerful opportunity both to celebrate and explore the diversity that already 
exists in your classroom, and to prepare your learners to be socially responsible citizens in a globalized world.
Three Elements of Meaningful In-Depth Explorations of Diverse Musical Traditions
Experiencing Music with a Culture Bearer
The most effective ways to bring music from any tradition into your music room include:
• inviting a guest musician or culture bearer into your classroom to share their knowledge and lived 
experiences
• using video performances and interviews to provide the next best “immersion” experience for your 
learners (if a guest is not possible) 
• using audio performances and interviews with photographs provided for visual context
When it comes to musics that are not our own, we are far from experts, so we should look to those who 
are! Adopt a mindset of being an “explorer” of new musics along with your learners, and seek out resources 
that were made by or in consultation with a member of that culture to help ensure you are being respectful 
and sharing the music appropriately.
Context and Opportunity for Connection
Help your learners make connections with their own lived experiences and build empathy by:
• placing music within its sociocultural context 
• sharing stories and picture books
• celebrating holidays
• exploring a message or shared experience with which your learners can connect
What similarities can learners find between this musical tradition and their own lives? What connections 
can they make to other music they’ve explored? Learners at this level can identify shared experiences across 
cultural traditions, such as the common experience of dancing at a celebration or singing lullabies to babies, 
and are often eager to share their own.
Active Engagement and Music Making
Provide active music making opportunities for you and your learners to explore and engage with all musics 
to interact and create deeper connections with the music being explored, including:
• participatory community dances with simple steps
• call and response or simple repetitive songs in their original language
• rhythms that can be recreated on classroom instruments when authentic instruments are not available
When possible, try to mimic the transmission processes of the musical tradition. Do they learn music by 
rote? Do they participate in group improvisation? Use this as a chance to try something new!
Elaborations

34
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA   

Citizenship 

Critical Thinking Personal-Career Development  Essential
Graduation
Competencies

Communication  

Technological Fluency  

Creativity and Innovation  
a. perform their music with each other within their classroom environment;
b. perform their music with others in informal settings; 
c. perform their music with others in simple, short and small formal settings; and
d. demonstrate performance etiquette both as a performer or audience member.
SHARING & PERFORMING 
SP 1
Learners are expected to ...
perform musical pieces for a variety of audiences.
RememberingUnderstandingApplyingAnalysingEvaluatingCreating
Learners who have achieved this outcome should be able to ...
Achievement Indicators
Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)

35
  K-3 MUSIC - MUSA  
           SHARING & PERFORMING
SP 1
Learners are expected to share their musical pieces with one another, their teacher, school, parents and 
community. This creating and sharing presentation process requires much social interaction. The many aspects 
of music making (movement, singing, dramatization, and playing instruments) allows individuals to play their 
favourite part in the sharing process. Sharing their most comfortable musical gifts with others in smaller and 
increasingly larger settings will help kindergarten learners to develop their understanding that this is a very 
important step in their music making process.
Simple Collaborative Skills for Best Music Making, Sharing and Performing:
Learners gain an understanding of the importance of working with others in the creating and sharing music 
making process by:
• showing positive creative musical play
• respecting their own and others' space bubble
• applying self-regulation skills
• applying social-emotional skills
• actively listening to others
• learning their sense of place and purpose within the musical experience
Kindergarten learners will develop an important sense of who they uniquely are and where they uniquely fit 
within their class through the sharing and performing experience. The process of creative musical play with 
a focus on a sharing adventure allows for a further exploration of emotions that can be experienced with 
different themes for different audiences. Such a new and exciting musical activity should be embraced in 
small and simple steps with a very positive outlook. This can help alleviate any hesitations towards sharing  
experiences.
Sharing Performances Ideas  
Informal Performance
An informal approach to sharing and performing continues to be most appropriate for this age. Not having 
a set performance date makes this a more relaxed experience and shifts the focus on the process over the 
product. Some examples are:
• sharing with other classmates and their homeroom teacher
• inviting school classes to the musicroom to see a work in progress or a finished product of a work
• inviting their class community families to a sharing session
• recording the performances using audio/video to be showcased online for families to watch
Formal Performance
A formal approach to sharing and performing focuses on the process of preparing for a school concert with 
an established date. Some examples of more relaxed approaches in a larger and more formal setting at the 
primary level are:
• establishing a countdown to the special concert date
• creating small, short, and simple sharing performances within the larger school concert setting
• encouraging positive and meaningful sharing of their special musical gifts to the audience
Elaborations

36
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA   

Citizenship 

Critical Thinking Personal-Career Development  Essential
Graduation
Competencies

Communication  

Technological Fluency  

Creativity and Innovation  
a. identify the choices made during the creative musical process to their work and the work of others; 
b. depict simple responses as a performer or audience member to a performance;
c. articulate simple constructive feedback about musical creations and performances;
d. examine kindergarten elements used in their live and recorded performances; and 
e. identify emotional responses to their musical creations and sharing opportunities.
REFLECTING, RESPONDING, & ANALYZING 
RRA 1
Learners are expected to ...
refine live and recorded performances using the creative musical process.
RememberingUnderstandingApplyingAnalysingEvaluatingCreating
Learners who have achieved this outcome should be able to ...
Achievement Indicators
Specific Curriculum Outcomes (SCOs)

37
  K-3 MUSIC - MUSA  
           REFLECTING, RESPONDING &           ANALYSING
RRA 1
Learners are expected to reflect upon, and respond to musical performances in a variety of ways through 
musical play. Kindergarten learners will be able to practice active listening and critical thinking skills while 
exploring the elements of music through movement, discussion, listening, drawing, dramatizing, or playing 
instruments. Learners will also learn how to acknowledge differing purposes, views, and reactions to music 
while working with others. Such a creative music making process gives opportunity for learners to develop 
an important sense of who they uniquely are and where they uniquely fit within their class. It also enables 
an opportunity for the exploration of emotions that can be experienced while music making with different 
themes. 
Reflecting and Responding Ideas
Simple questions to provoke active listening, critical 
thinking and reflection:
• Can you use one word to describe the shared 
music?
• Can you use one word to describe how the music 
makes you feel!
• What instrument could you add to make the 
music better?
• What kindergarten musical elements are hiding in 
the music?
• What did we do well?  
• What can we work on if we share this music 
again?
Simple ways to encourage learners to respond and 
reflect upon what they felt about their music making 
sharing process plus how they might create an even 
better future musical performance are:
• drawing a picture
• describing emotions expressed by the music
• dramatizing an emotion they felt 
• creating a movement to show how the music 
made them feel
• playing an instrument to make the music better
• using scarves to draw their musical interpretation
Elaborations

38
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA   

1MUSA
Curriculum Guide
ARTS EDUCATION
Grade 1 Music

40
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA   

41
  K-3 MUSIC - MUSA  
GRADE 1 MUSIC (1MUSA) COURSE OVERVIEW
Course Description: 1MUSA
Music is a language that we must explore and experience to fully understand its unique characteristics. This PEI 
elementary music curricula embraces the discovery of the musical language using a sound before symbol, learner-
centred process in which learners and music specialists engage in purposeful musical play. The learners will experience 
and demonstrate the grade level elements, concepts and skills using voice, body and instruments before identifying the 
musical language symbol. Formative elements, concepts, and skills will continue to be expanded upon throughout the 
elementary years. Foundational learnings need to be experienced and understood before moving onto more complex 
musical elements. 
The outcomes of the elementary music curriculum are categorized into the following 6 GCOs:
• Creating & Composing
• Musical Elements
• Musical Artistry
• Cultural Contexts and Connections
• Sharing and Performing
• Reflecting, Responding, & Analyzing
Grade one music learners will explore the musical elements by moving, using their various voices, dramatizing, 
visualizing, listening, improvising, composing, and playing instruments. Through such creative music making, learners 
will continue to develop their early musical literacy skills. With the foundational knowledge of the kindergarten musical 
language previously experienced, demonstrated and identified, there is an expectation that grade one learners will be 
able to build upon their formative learnings in order to discover the grade one musical elements. At this age, learners 
are beginning to have an understanding of music room protocols and procedures, their own and others importance 
within the music making process, and their foundational music language learnings that can be showcased as they are 
discovering new grade one musical elements.
The music making environment should be structured in a welcoming learner-centred way that empowers the creative 
spirit of the grade one learner. When instruments (pitched and/or non-pitched) are set up in advance by the teacher 
in the primary level  learning space, there is more time for effective transitions and creative musical play. With such an 
engaging classroom set up, there are many opportunities for the music specialist and learners to create, sing, move and 
play while exploring the grade one musical elements.
The music specialist engages with the learners in their music making, facilitating an atmosphere of imaginative, creative 
and critical inquiry-based musical play while nurturing a foundational understanding of the grade one musical elements. 
Such learning can be experienced through the exploration of favourite themes and daily life experiences using simple 
songs and/or nursery rhymes with Orffestrations, storybooks and/or poems with sound stories, soundscapes, and/or 
sound carpets, plus musical centres, word play/chain rhythm fun, activities and games. This music making process allows 
an opportunity for exploration of self and others, thus encouraging an environment fostering social emotional awareness 
and diversity, equity and inclusion.

42
K-3 MUSIC - MUSA   
GRADE 1 MUSIC (1MUSA) COURSE OVERVIEW
Outcome Summary
The outcomes of 1MUSA are categorized into 6 GCOs. These GCOs and specific outcomes are designed to provide 
learners a holistic introduction to the skills and competencies needed for success. Each outcome, with its related 
achievement indicators and elaborations, can be found on the following pages.
Table 5.  Summary of Curriculum Outcomes
GCOCodeSpecific Curriculum Outcome
Creating & 
Composing
CC 1.1create music using their voice, body, and instruments through musical play.
CC 1.2
compose simple musical ideas using invented notations, standard notations, and 
technology.
Musical 
Elements
ME 1demonstrate the elements of music through musical play.
Musical Artistry
MA 1.1demonstrate proper technique playing pitched and non-pitched percussion instruments.
MA 1.2demonstrate their